@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

It is possible you will encounter a bug in one of the Radius programs. If this
happens, we would like to hear about it. As the purpose of bug reporting
is to improve software, please be sure to include maximum information
when reporting a bug. The information needed is:

@itemize @bullet
@item Conditions under which the bug appears.
@item Version of the package you are using.
@item Compilation options used when configuring the package.
@item If the bug is found in @command{radiusd} daemon, run
@samp{radiusd -v} and include the output it produces.
@item Contents of Radius configuration directory (@file{@value{RADDB}}
or whatever
you have set it to while configuring).
@item Log messages produced.
@end itemize

Send your report to @email{bug-gnu-radius@@gnu.org}. Allow us a couple of
days to answer.

@comment *******************************************************************
@node News
@chapter Where to Get Information about GNU Radius

The two places to look for news regarding GNU Radius are
the Radius homepage at @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/radius}
and the Radius project page at @url{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/radius}.

The following mailing lists are related to GNU Radius:

@table @email
@item info-gnu-radius@@gnu.org
This list distributes announcements and progress reports on GNU
Radius. This is a moderated list. Please do not send bug reports
or requests for help to this list; there exist special mailing
lists for these purposes. To subscribe to the list, visit
@url{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/info-gnu-radius}.
@item help-gnu-radius@@gnu.org
This list is the place for users and installers of GNU Radius to ask
for help. The list is not moderated, but postings are allowed for
list members only. To subscribe to the list, visit
@url{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/help-gnu-radius}.
@item bug-gnu-radius@@gnu.org
This list distributes bug reports, bug fixes, and suggestions for
improvements in Radius. User discussion of Radius bugs also occurs here.
The list is not moderated; postings are allowed for anybody.
To subscribe to the list, visit
@url{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-gnu-radius}.
@end table
