@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001,2002,2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Builddbm, Radscm, Radctl, Utility Programs
@section @command{builddbm}
@pindex buildbm

@subheading Usage
@command{builddbm} converts the plaintext Radius users database into
DBM files. Some versions of the Radius daemon have used this to
speed up the access to the users database.
However, with GNU Radius things go the other way around.
The server reads the entire plaintext database, converts it into internal
form, and stores into a hash table, which provides for fast
access. Actually, using a DBM version of the users database slows
down the access unless the machine that runs the Radius daemon is
short of address space for the daemon to store the users database.

@subheading Syntax
When used without arguments, the @command{builddbm} utility attempts to
convert the file @file{raddb/users} to @file{raddb/users.db} or to
the pair
@file{raddb/users.pag}, @file{raddb/users.dir}, depending on the
version of the DBM library used.

If used with one argument, that argument is taken as the name of the
plaintext database file to operate upon.

Use the following command line options to modify the operation of
@command{buildbm}:

@table @option
@item -d @var{dir}
Specifies alternate directory for the Radius configuration
files. This defaults to @file{@value{RADDB}}.

@item -h
Outputs short usage summary and exits with 0 exit code.
@end table
