@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Configuration Files
@chapter Radius Configuration Files
@cindex Radiusd configuration files
@cindex Configuration files (radiusd)

At startup, GNU Radius obtains the information vital for its
functioning from a number of configuration files. These are normally
found in @value{RADDB} directory, which is defined at configuration
time, although their location can be specified at runtime. In the
discussion below we will refer to this directory by @file{raddb}.
@xref{Naming Conventions}.

Each configuration file is responsible for a certain part of the
GNU Radius functionality. The following table lists all configuration
files along with a brief description of their purposes.

@table @file
@item config
Determines the runtime defaults for @command{radiusd}, such
as the IP address and ports to listen on, the sizes of the request
queues, configuration of the SNMP subsystem, fine-tuning of the
extension languages, etc.

@item clients
Lists the shared secret belonging to each @NAS{}. It is
crucial for the normal request processing that each @NAS{} have an
entry in this file. The requests from @NAS{}es that are not listed
in @file{clients} will be ignored, as well as those from the @NAS{}es
that have a wrong value for the shared secret configured in this file.

@item naslist
Defines the types for the known @NAS{}es. Its information is
used mainly when performing multiple login checking
(@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}).

@item nastypes
Declares the known @NAS{} types. The symbolic type names,
declared in this file can be used in @file{naslist}.

@item dictionary
Defines the symbolic names for radius attributes and attribute
values. Only the names declared in this file may be used in the files
@file{users}, @file{hints} and @file{huntgroups}.

@item huntgroups
Contains special rules that process the incoming requests
basing on the @NAS{} IP and port number they come from. These can also
be used as a kind of @dfn{access control list}.

@item hints
Defines the matching rules that modify the incoming
request depending on the user name and its credentials.

@item users
Contains the individual users' profiles.

@item realms
Defines the Radius realms and the servers that are
responsible for them.

@item access.deny
A list of usernames that should not be allowed access via Radius.

@item sqlserver
Contains the configuration for the @sc{sql} system. This includes the
type of @sc{sql} interface used, the IP and port number of the server
and the definition of the @sc{sql} requests used by @command{radiusd}.

@item rewrite
Contains the source code of functions in Rewrite extension language.

@item menus
A subdirectory containing the authentication menus.
@end table

The rest of this chapter describes each of these files in detail.

@menu
* config file::         Run-time configuration options.
* dictionary file::     Radius dictionary.
* clients file::        Clients lists the @NAS{}es that are allowed to
                        communicate with radius.
* naslist file::        The naslist file keeps general information about
                        the @NAS{}es.
* nastypes file::       Information about how to query the @NAS{}es about
                        active user sessions.
* hints file::          Important user information that is common for the
                        users whose names match some pattern.
* huntgroups file::     Group users by the @NAS{} (and, possibly, a port
                        number) they come from.
* realms file::         Communication with remote radius servers
* users file::          User profile.
* access.deny file::    List of users which are denied access.
* sqlserver file::      SQL server configuration.
* rewrite file::        Rewrite functions allow to change the input
                        packets.
* menus directory::     Menus allow user to select the type of
                        service.
* Macro Substitution::  Macros which are expanded by the actual
                        attribute values.
@end menu

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node config file
@section Run-Time Configuration Options --- @file{raddb/config}
@cindex Radiusd configuration
@cindex @file{raddb/config} file

At startup @command{radiusd} obtains its configuration values from three
places. The basic configuration is kept in the executable module
itself.  These values are overridden by those obtained from
@file{raddb/config} file. Finally, the options obtained from the
command line override the first two sets of options.

When re-reading of the configuration is initiated either by
@code{SIGHUP} signal or by SNMP channel any changes in the config file
take precedence over command line arguments, since @file{raddb/config} is
the only way to change configuration of the running program.

This chapter discusses the @file{raddb/config} file in detail.

The @file{raddb/config} consists of statements and comments.
Statements end with a semicolon. Many statements contain a block
of sub-statements which also terminate with a semicolon.

Comments can be written in shell, C, or C++ constructs, i.e. any
of the following represent a valid comment:

@example
# A shell comment
/* A C-style
 * multi-line comment
 */
// A C++-style comment
@end example

These are the basic statements:
@menu
* option::      @code{Option} block: set the global program options.
* logging::     Fine-tune the logging.
* auth::        Configure authentication service.
* acct::        Configure accounting service.
* usedbm::      Enable the DBM feature.
* snmp::        Configure SNMP service.
* rewrite::     Configure Rewrite interface.
* guile::       Configure Guile interface.
* message::     Configure server reply messages.
* filters::     Configure authentication and accounting filters.
* mlc::         Configure multiple login checking.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node option
@subsection @code{option} block
@cindex Run-time options (radiusd)
@kwindex option
@kwindex source-ip
@kwindex max-requests
@kwindex max-processes
@kwindex process-idle-timeout
@kwindex master-read-timeout
@kwindex master-write-timeout
@kwindex radiusd-user
@kwindex exec-program-user
@kwindex username-chars
@kwindex log-dir
@kwindex acct-dir
@kwindex resolve

@subheading Syntax:

@example
option @{
        source-ip @var{number} ;
        max-requests @var{number} ;
        radiusd-user @var{string} ;
        exec-program-user @var{string} ;
        username-chars @var{string} ;
        log-dir @var{string} ;
        acct-dir @var{string} ;
        resolve @var{bool} ;
        max-processes @var{number} ;
        process-idle-timeout @var{number} ;
        master-read-timeout @var{number} ;
        master-write-timeout @var{number} ;
@} ;
@end example

@subheading Usage

The @code{option} block defines the global options to be used by @command{radiusd}.

@subheading Boolean statements

@table @code

@item resolve
Determines whether radius should resolve the IP addresses for diagnostic
output. Specifying @code{resolve no} speeds up the server and reduces
the network traffic.

@end table

@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code

@item source-ip
Sets the source @IP{}. When this statement is not present, the
@IP{} of the first available network interface on the machine
will be used as source.

@item max-requests
Sets the maximum number of the requests in queue.

@item max-processes
Sets the maximum number of child processes. The default value is
16. If you plan to raise this value, make sure you have enough
file descriptors available, as each child occupies four descriptors
for its input/output channels.

@item process-idle-timeout
Sets the maximum idle time for child processes. A child terminates
if it does not receive any requests from the main process within this
number of seconds. By default, this parameter is 3600 seconds
(one hour).

@item master-read-timeout
@itemx master-write-timeout
These two values set the timeout values for the interprocess input/output
operations in the main server process. More specifically,
@code{master-read-timeout} sets the maximum number of seconds the main
process will wait for the answer from the subprocess, and
@code{master-write-timeout} sets the maximum number of seconds the main
process will wait for the subprocess's communication channel to become
ready for input. By default, no timeouts are imposed.

@end table

@subheading String statements
@table @code
@item radiusd-user
Instructs @command{radiusd} to drop root privileges and to switch to
the real user and group IDs of the given user after becoming
daemon. Notice the following implications of this statement:

@enumerate 1
@item All configuration files must be readable for this user.
@item Authentication type @code{System} (@pxref{System Auth}) requires
root privileges, so it cannot be used with @code{radiusd-user}. Any
@file{raddb/users} profiles using this authentication type will be
discarded.
@item Authentication type @code{PAM} (@pxref{PAM Auth}) may require root
privileges. It is reported to always require root privileges on some
systems (notably on Solaris).
@item @code{exec-program-user} statement (see below) is ignored when
used with @code{radiusd-user}.
@end enumerate

@item exec-program-user
Sets the privileges for the programs executed as a result of
@attr{Exec-Program} and @attr{Exec-Program-Wait}. The real user
and group ids will be retrieved from the @file{/etc/passwd} entry
for the given user.

@item username-chars
Determines characters that are valid within a username. The alphanumeric
characters are always allowed in a username, it is not necessary to
specify them in this statement. By default the following characters
are allowed in a username: @samp{.-_!@@#$%^&\/"}. The
@code{username-chars} statement overrides this default, thus setting:

@example
username-chars ":"
@end example

@noindent
will restrict the set of allowed characters to the alphanumeric
characters and colon. If you wish to expand the default character
set, you will have to explicitly specify it in the
@code{username-chars} argument, as shown in the example below:

@example
username-chars ".-_!@@#$%^&\\/\":"
@end example

@noindent
(Notice the use of escape character @samp{\}).

@item log-dir
Specifies the logging directory.

@item acct-dir
Specifies the accounting directory.

@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node logging
@subsection @code{logging} block
@cindex Logging, @file{config} statement
@kwindex logging

@subheading Syntax:

@example
logging @{
        prefix-hook @var{string} ;
        suffix-hook @var{string} ;
        category category_spec @{
                channel channel_name ;
                print-auth @var{bool} ;
                print-pass @var{bool} ;
                print-failed-pass @var{bool} ;
                level @var{debug_level} ;
        @} ;
        channel channel_name @{
                file @var{string} ;
                syslog @var{facility} . @var{priority} [@var{tag}] ;
                print-pid @var{bool} ;
                print-category @var{bool} ;
                print-cons @var{bool} ;
                print-level @var{bool} ;
                print-priority @var{bool} ;
                print-tid @var{bool};
                print-milliseconds @var{bool};
                prefix-hook @var{string} ;
                suffix-hook @var{string} ;
        @};
@} ;

@end example

@subheading Usage

The @code{logging} statement describes the course followed by
@command{radiusd}'s logging information.

The parts of this statement are discussed below.

@menu
* hooks::            Logging hooks
* category::         @code{category} statement.
* channel::          @code{channel} statement.
* logging example::  Example of the @code{logging} statement.
@end menu

@comment **L4***************************************************************
@node hooks
@subsubsection Logging hooks
@cindex Logging hook
@kwindex prefix-hook
@kwindex suffix-hook

Most diagnostic messages displayed by @command{radiusd} describe
some events that occurred while processing a certain incoming request.
By default they contain only a short summary of the event.
@dfn{Logging hooks} are means of controlling actual amount of
information displayed in such messages. They allow you to add to the
message being displayed any relevant information from the incoming
request that caused the message to appear.

A @dfn{hook} is a special Rewrite function that takes three arguments
and returns a string. There are two kinds of logging hooks: @dfn{prefix}
and @dfn{suffix}. Return value from the prefix hook function will
be displayed before the actual log message, that of the suffix hook
function will be displayed after the message.

Furthermore, there may be @dfn{global} and @dfn{channel-specific
hooks}. Global hooks apply to all categories, unless overridden by
category-specific hooks. Global prefix hook is enabled by
@code{prefix-hook} statement appearing in the @code{logging} block.
Global suffix hook is enabled by @code{suffix-hook} statement.
Both statements take as their argument the name of corresponding
Rewrite function.

For detailed information about writing logging hooks,
@xref{Logging Hook Functions}.

@comment **L4***************************************************************
@node category
@subsubsection @code{category} statement
@cindex Logging category
@kwindex category
@kwindex channel
@kwindex print-auth
@kwindex print-pass
@kwindex print-failed-pass
@kwindex level

Each line of logging information generated by @command{radiusd} has an
associated @dfn{category}.  The @code{logging} statement allows each
category of output to be controlled independently of the others.
The logging category is defined by @dfn{category name} and a
@dfn{priority}. @dfn{category name} determines what part of radiusd
daemon is allowed to send its logging information to this channel.
It can be any of @code{main}, @code{auth}, @code{acct}, @code{proxy},
@code{snmp}. @dfn{Priority} determines the minimum priority of
the messages displayed by this channel. The priorities in ascending
order are: @code{debug}, @code{info}, @code{notice}, @code{warn},
@code{err}, @code{crit}, @code{alert}, @code{emerg}.

The full category specification, denoted by the @code{category_spec}
in the above section, can take any of the following three forms:

@table @asis
@item category_name
Print the messages of given category.
@item priority
Print messages of all categories, abridged by given priority. If the
priority is prefixed with @samp{=}, only messages with given priority
will be displayed. If it is prefixed with @samp{!}, the messages with
priority other than the specified will be displayed. Otherwise, the
messages with priorities equal to or greater than the specified will
be displayed.
@item category_name . priority
Print the messages of given category, abridged by given priority. The
priority may be prefixed with either @samp{=} or @samp{!} as described
above. The dot (@samp{.}) separates the priority from the category
name, it may be surrounded by any amount of whitespace.
@end table

Additional category options valid for @code{auth} category are:

@table @code
@item print-auth
Log individual authentications.
@item print-pass
Include passwords for successful authentications. It is @emph{very}
insecure, since all users' passwords will be echoed in the logfile.
This option is provided only for debugging purposes.
@item print-failed-pass
Include passwords for failed authentications.
@end table

@comment **L4***************************************************************
@node channel
@subsubsection @code{channel} statement
@cindex Logging channel
@kwindex channel
@kwindex file
@kwindex syslog
@kwindex print-pid
@kwindex print-category
@kwindex print-cons
@kwindex print-level
@kwindex print-priority
@kwindex print-tid
@kwindex print-milliseconds
@kwindex prefix-hook
@kwindex suffix-hook

Channels represent methods for recording logging information.  Each
channel has a unique name, and any categories which specify that name in
a @code{channel} statement will use that channel.

@command{radiusd} can write logging information to files or send it to
syslog.  The @code{file} statement sends the channel's output to the
named file (@pxref{Naming Conventions}).  The @code{syslog} statement
sends the channel's output to syslog with the specified facility and
severity.  Its optional last argument allows to alter default syslog
tag.

Channel options modify the data flowing through the channel:

@table @code
@item print-pid
Add the process @sc{id} of the process generating the logging information.
@item print-cons
Also send the logging information to the system console.
@item print-category
Add the category name to the logging information.
@item print-priority
@itemx print-level
Add the priority name to the logging information.
@item print-milliseconds
Print timestamp with milliseconds.
@item prefix-hook
Declares the name of Rewrite function used as logging prefix hook for that
channel (@pxref{hooks}). This overrides any global prefix hook.
@item suffix-hook
Declares the name of Rewrite function used as logging suffix hook for that
channel (@pxref{hooks}). This overrides any global suffix hook.
@end table

@comment **L4***************************************************************
@node logging example
@subsubsection Example of the @code{logging} statement
@exindex @command{logging} statement

@example
logging @{
        channel default @{
                file "radius.log";
                print-category yes;
                print-priority yes;
        @};
        channel info @{
                file "radius.info";
                print-pid yes;
                print-cons yes;
                print-priority yes;
        @};
        channel notice @{
                syslog auth.notice;
        @};

        category auth @{
                print-auth yes;
                print-failed-pass yes;
        @};
        category notice @{
                channel notice;
        @};
        category info @{
                channel info;
        @};
        category debug @{
                channel info;
                level radiusd=1,files;
        @};

        category *.!debug @{
                channel default;
        @};
@};
@end example

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node auth
@subsection @code{auth} statement
@cindex Authentication service parameters
@cindex Customizing authentication server
@kwindex auth
@kwindex listen
@kwindex port
@kwindex max-requests
@kwindex time-to-live
@kwindex request-cleanup-delay
@kwindex detail
@kwindex strip-names
@kwindex checkrad-assume-logged
@kwindex password-expire-warning
@kwindex compare-attribute-flag
@subheading Syntax:

@example
auth @{
        listen ( @var{addr-list} | no );
        forward @var{addr-list};
        port @var{number} ;
        max-requests @var{number} ;
        time-to-live @var{number} ;
        request-cleanup-delay @var{number} ;
        detail @var{bool} ;
        strip-names @var{bool} ;
        checkrad-assume-logged @var{bool} ;
        password-expire-warning @var{number} ;
        compare-atribute-flag @var{character} ;
        trace-rules @var{bool} ;
        reject-malformed-names @var{bool} ;
@} ;
@end example

@subheading Usage:
The @code{auth} statement configures the parameters of the authentication
service.

@subheading @code{listen} statement

This statement determines on which addresses radiusd will listen for incoming
authentication requests. Its argument is a comma-separated list of items
in the form @var{ip}:@var{port-number}. @var{ip} can be either an IP
address in familiar ``dotted-quad'' notation or a
hostname. :@var{port-number} part may be omitted, in which case the
default authentication port is assumed.

If the @code{listen} statement is omitted, radiusd will accept incoming
requests from any interface on the machine.

The special value @code{no} disables listening for authentication
requests.

The following example configures radius to listen for the incoming
requests on the default authentication port on the address 10.10.10.1
and on port 1645 on address 10.10.11.2.

@example
listen 10.10.10.1, 10.10.11.2:1645;
@end example

@subheading @code{forward} statement

This statement enables @dfn{forwarding} of the requests to the given
set of servers. Forwarding is an experimental feature of GNU Radius,
it differs from proxying in that the requests are sent to the remote
server (or servers) @emph{and} processed locally. The remote server
is not expected to reply.

This mode is intended primarily for debugging purposes. It could also
be useful in some very complex and unusual configurations.

@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code
@item port
Sets the number of which @sc{udp} port to listen on for the
authentication requests.

@item max-requests
Sets the maximum number of authentication requests in the queue. Any
surplus requests will be discarded.

@item time-to-live
Sets the request time-to-live in seconds. The time-to-live is the time
to wait for the completion of the request. If the request job isn't
completed within this interval of time it is cleared, the corresponding
child process killed and the request removed from the queue.

@item request-cleanup-delay
Sets the request cleanup delay in seconds, i.e. determines how long will
the completed authentication request reside in the queue.

@item password-expire-warning
Sets the time interval for password expiration warning. If user's
password expires within given number of seconds, radiusd will send
a warning along with authentication-acknowledge response. Default
is 0.
@end table

@subheading Boolean statements

@table @code

@item detail
When set to true, @command{radiusd} will produce the detailed log of each
received packet in the file @file{radacct/@var{nasname}/detail.auth}. The
format of such log files is identical to the format of detailed
accounting files (@pxref{Detailed Request Accounting}).

@item strip-names
Determines whether @command{radiusd} should strip any prefixes/suffixes
off the username before logging.

@item checkrad-assume-logged
@xref{mlc}, for the description of this setting. It is accepted in
@code{auth} for compatibility with previous versions of GNU Radius.

@item trace-rules
Enables tracing of the configuration rules that were matched during
processing of each received authentication request. @xref{Rule
Tracing}, for detailed information about this mode.

@item reject-malformed-names
Enables sending access-reject replies for the access-accept requests
that contain an invalid value in @attr{User-Name} attribute. By default
such requests are discarded without answering. See the description of
@code{username-chars} (@pxref{option,username-chars,Option statement}).

@end table

@subheading Character statement

@table @code
@item compare-attribute-flag
The argument to this statement is a character from @samp{1} through
@samp{9}. This statement modifies the request comparison method for
authentication requests. @xref{Extended Comparison}, for a detailed
description of its usage.

@end table


@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node acct
@subsection @code{acct} statement
@cindex Accounting service parameters
@cindex Customizing accounting service
@kwindex acct statement
@kwindex listen
@kwindex port
@kwindex max-requests
@kwindex time-to-live
@kwindex request-cleanup-delay
@kwindex detail
@kwindex compare-atribute-flag

@subheading Syntax:
@example
acct @{
        listen ( @var{addr-list} | no );
        forward @var{addr-list} ;
        port @var{number} ;
        detail @var{bool};
        system @var{bool};
        max-requests @var{number} ;
        time-to-live @var{number} ;
        request-cleanup-delay @var{number} ;
        compare-atribute-flag @var{character} ;
        trace-rules @var{bool} ;
@} ;
@end example

@subheading Usage:

The @code{acct} statement configures the parameters of the accounting
service.

@subheading @code{listen} statement

This statement determines on which addresses radiusd will listen for incoming
accounting requests. Its argument is a comma-separated list of items
in the form @var{ip}:@var{port-number}. @var{ip} can be either an IP
address in familiar ``dotted-quad'' notation or a
hostname. :@var{port-number} part may be omitted, in which case the
default accounting port is assumed.

If the @code{listen} statement is omitted, radiusd will accept incoming
requests from any interface on the machine.

The special value @code{no} disables listening for accounting
requests.

The following example configures radius to listen for the incoming
requests on the default accounting port on the address 10.10.10.1
and on port 1646 on address 10.10.11.2.

@example
listen 10.10.10.1, 10.10.11.2:1646;
@end example

@subheading @code{forward} statement

This statement enables @dfn{forwarding} of the requests to the given
set of servers. Forwarding is an experimental feature of GNU Radius,
it differs from proxying in that the requests are sent to the remote
server (or servers) @emph{and} processed locally. The remote server
is not expected to reply.

This mode is intended primarily for debugging purposes. It could also
be useful in some very complex and unusual configurations.

@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code
@item port
Sets the number of which port to listen for the authentication requests.

@item max-requests
Sets the maximum number of accounting requests in the queue. Any
surplus requests will be discarded.

@item time-to-live
Sets the request time-to-live in seconds. The time-to-live is the time
to wait for the completion of the request. If the request job isn't
completed within this interval of time it is cleared, the corresponding
child process killed and the request removed from the queue.

@item request-cleanup-delay
Sets the request cleanup delay in seconds, i.e. determines how long will
the completed account request reside in the queue.

@end table

@subheading Boolean statements

@table @code
@item detail
When set to @code{no}, disables detailed accounting
(@pxref{Detailed Request Accounting}).

@item system
When set to @code{no}, disables system accounting (@pxref{System
Accounting}). Notice, that this will disable simultaneous use checking
as well, unless you supply an alternative @sc{mlc} method (currently
@sc{sql}, @xref{Multiple Login Checking}, for the detailed discussion
of this).

@item trace-rules
Enables tracing of the configuration rules that were matched during
processing of each received accounting request. @xref{Rule
Tracing}, for detailed information about this mode.
@end table

@subheading Character statement

@table @code
@item compare-attribute-flag
The argument to this statement is a character from @samp{1} through
@samp{9}. This statement modifies the request comparison method for
authentication requests. @xref{Extended Comparison}, for a detailed
description of its usage.

@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node usedbm
@subsection @code{usedbm} statement
@cindex DBM: enabling
@cindex Enabling DBM
@kwindex usedbm

@subheading Syntax:
@example
usedbm ( yes | no ) ;
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{usedbm} statement determines whether the DBM support should
be enabled.

@table @code
@item no
Do not use DBM support at all.

@item yes
Use only the DBM database and ignore @file{raddb/users}.

@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node snmp
@subsection @code{snmp} statement
@cindex SNMP service parameters
@cindex Customizing SNMP server
@kwindex snmp
@kwindex port
@kwindex max-requests
@kwindex time-to-live
@kwindex request-cleanup-delay
@kwindex ident
@kwindex community
@kwindex network
@kwindex acl
@kwindex allow
@kwindex deny
@kwindex storage
@kwindex file
@kwindex perms
@kwindex max-nas-count
@kwindex max-port-count

@subheading Syntax:
@example
snmp @{
        port @var{portno} ;
        listen ( @var{addr-list} | no );
        max-requests @var{number} ;
        time-to-live @var{number} ;
        request-cleanup-delay @var{number} ;
        ident @var{string} ;
        community @var{name} ( rw | ro ) ;
        network @var{name} @var{network} [ @var{network} ... ] ;
        acl @{
                allow @var{network_name} @var{community_name} ;
                deny @var{network_name} ;
        @} ;
        storage @{
                file @var{filename} ;
                perms @var{number} ;
                max-nas-count @var{number} ;
                max-port-count @var{number} ;
        @} ;
@};
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{snmp} statement configures the SNMP service.

@subheading @code{listen} statement

The @code{listen} statement determines on which addresses radiusd will
listen for incoming SNMP requests. The argument is a comma-separated
list of items in the form @var{ip}:@var{port-number}. The @var{ip} can
be either an IP address in familiar ``dotted-quad'' notation or a
hostname. The :@var{port-number} part may be omitted, in which case the
default SNMP port (161) is used.

If the @code{listen} statement is omitted, radiusd will accept incoming
requests from any interface on the machine.

The special value @code{no} disables listening for SNMP requests.

The following example configures radius to listen for the incoming
SNMP requests on the default SNMP port on the address 10.10.10.1
and on port 4500 on address 10.10.11.2.

@example
listen 10.10.10.1, 10.10.11.2:4500;
@end example


@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code
@item port
Sets the number of which port to listen for the SNMP requests.

@item max-requests
Sets the maximum number of SNMP requests in the queue. Any
surplus requests will be discarded.

@item time-to-live
Sets the request time-to-live in seconds. The time-to-live is the time
to wait for the completion of the request. If the request job isn't
completed within this interval of time it is cleared, the corresponding
child process killed and the request removed from the queue.

@item request-cleanup-delay
Sets the request cleanup delay in seconds, i.e. determines how long will
the completed SNMP request reside in the queue.

@end table

@subheading String statements

@table @code
@item ident
Sets the SNMP server identification string.
@end table

@subheading Community and network definitions

@table @code
@item community @var{name} ( rw | ro )
Defines the community @var{name} as read-write (@code{rw}) or read-only
(@code{ro}).

@item network @var{name} @var{network} [ @var{network} ... ]
Groups several networks or hosts under one logical network name.

@end table

@subheading Access-Control List definitions

@table @code
@item allow @var{network_name} @var{community_name}
allow hosts from the group @var{network_name} access to community
@var{community_name}.

@item deny @var{NETWORK_NAME}
Deny access to SNMP service from any host in the group @var{network_name}.
@end table

@subheading Storage control

GNU Radius stores the SNMP monitoring data in an area of shared
memory mapped to an external file. This allows all subprocesses
to share this information and to accumulate the statistics across
invocations of the daemon.

The @code{storage} statement controls the usage of the storage for
the SNMP data.

@table @code
@item file
Sets the file name for the SNMP storage file. Unless the filename
begins with a @samp{/} it is taken as relative to the current
logging directory.

@item perms
Sets the access permissions for the storage file. @emph{Notice}, that
this statement does not interpret its argument as octal by default, so
be sure to prefix it with @samp{0} to use an octal value.

@item max-nas-count
Sets maximum number of NASes the storage file is able to handle. Default
is 512. Raise this number if you see the following message in your log
file:

@cartouche
@example
reached SNMP storage limit for the number of
monitored NASes: increase max-nas-count
@end example
@end cartouche

@item max-port-count
Sets maximum number of ports the storage file is able to handle. Default
is 1024. Raise this number if you see the following message in your log
file:

@cartouche
@example
reached SNMP storage limit for the number of
monitored ports: increase max-port-count
@end example
@end cartouche

@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node rewrite
@subsection @code{rewrite} statement.
@cindex Rewrite language settings
@kwindex rewrite

@subheading Syntax:
@example
rewrite @{
        stack-size @var{number} ;
        load-path @var{string} ;
        load @var{string} ;
@};
@end example

The @code{rewrite} statement configures the use of GNU Radius
extension language @command{Rewrite}.  @xref{Rewrite}, for a detailed
discussion of the language.

@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code
@item stack-size
Configures runtime stack size for Rewrite. The @var{number} is the
size of stack in words. The default value is 4096.
@end table

@subheading String statements
@table @code
@item load-path
Add specified pathnames to the list of directories searched for
rewrite files. Argument is a list of directory pathnames, separated by
columns.
@item load
Loads the specified source file on startup. Unless @var{string} is an
absolute pathname, it will be searched in directories set up by
@code{load-path} statement.
@end table

@subheading Loading

The default load path is @code{@value{RADDB}:@value{DATADIR}/rewrite}.
@FIXME{Describe the loading process in detail. Also, some kind of
autoloading is necessary for Rewrite.}

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node guile
@subsection @code{guile} statement
@cindex Guile interface configuration
@cindex Customizing Radiusd Guile interface
@kwindex guile
@kwindex debug
@kwindex load-path
@kwindex load-module
@kwindex load
@kwindex gc-interval
@kwindex outfile
@kwindex eval
@UNREVISED{}

The @code{guile} statement allows to configure server interface with
Guile.

@subheading Syntax

@example
guile @{
        debug @var{bool} ;
        load-path @var{string} ;
        load @var{string} ;
        load-module @var{string} [ @var{string} ... ] ;
        eval @var{expression} [ @var{expression} ... ] ;
        gc-interval @var{number} ;
        outfile @var{string} ;
@};
@end example

@subheading Usage

@subheading Boolean statements

@table @code
@item debug
When set to yes, enables debugging evaluator and backtraces on Guile
scripts.
@end table

@subheading Numeric statements

@table @code
@item gc-interval
Configures the forced garbage collections. By default the invocation
of the garbage collector is run by the internal Guile mechanism.
However, you may force Radius to trigger the garbage collection
at fixed time intervals. The @code{gc-interval} statement sets
such interval in seconds.

For more information about Guile memory management system in general
and garbage collections in particular, see @ref{Memory Management,,Memory Management and Garbage Collection,guile,The Guile Reference Manual}.

@end table

@subheading String statements
@table @code
@item eval
Evaluates its argument as @code{Scheme} expression.

@item load-path
Adds specified pathname to @code{%load-path} variable.

@item load
Loads the specified source file on startup.

@item load-module
Loads the specified Scheme module on startup. This statement takes an
arbitrary number of arguments. The first argument specifies the name
of the module to load, the rest of arguments is passed to the
@dfn{module initialization} function. Module initialization function
is a function named @samp{@var{module}-init}, where @var{module} is
the module name. Arguments are converted using usual @code{Guile}
rules, except that the ones starting with a dash (@samp{-}) are
converted to keyword arguments.
@FIXME{Describe the loading sequence in more detail. Why are modules
preferred over plain SCM programs, etc.}

@item outfile
Redirects the standard output and standard error streams of the @code{Guile}
functions to the given file. Unless the filename starts with @samp{/},
it is taken relative to the current logging directory.
@end table

@xref{Guile}, for a detailed description of Guile extensions interface.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node message
@subsection @code{message} statement
@cindex Messages: configuring
@cindex Customizing reply messages
@kwindex message
@kwindex account-closed
@kwindex password-expired
@kwindex password-expire-warning
@kwindex access-denied
@kwindex realm-quota
@kwindex multiple-login
@kwindex second-login
@kwindex timespan-violation

The @code{message} statement allows to set up the messages that are
returned to the user with authentication-response packets.

@subheading Syntax

@example
message @{
        account-closed @var{string} ;
        password-expired @var{string} ;
        password-expire-warning @var{string} ;
        access-denied @var{string} ;
        realm-quota @var{string} ;
        multiple-login @var{string} ;
        second-login @var{string} ;
        timespan-violation @var{string} ;
@};
@end example

All variables in @code{message} block take a string argument. In
@var{string} you can use the usual C backslash notation to represent
non-printable characters. The use of %C@{@} and %R@{@} sequences
is also allowed (@pxref{Macro Substitution}).

@subheading String statements
@table @code
@item account-closed
This message will be returned to the user whose account is
administratively closed.
@item password-expired
This message will be returned to the user whose password has expired.
@item password-expire-warning
This is a warning message that will be returned along with an
authentication-acknowledge packet for the user whose password will
expire in less than @var{n} seconds. The value of @var{n} is set by
@code{password-expire-warning} variable in @code{auth} block.
@xref{auth}. In this string, you can use the %R@{Password-Expire-Days@}
substitution, to represent the actual number of @emph{days} left
to the expiration date. The default is

@example
Password Will Expire in %R@{Password-Expire-Days@} Days\r\n
@end example
@item access-denied
This message is returned to the user who supplies an incorrect password or
a not-existent user-name as his authentication credentials.
@item realm-quota
This message is returned when the user is trying to log in using a
realm, and number of users that are currently logged in from this realm
reaches maximum value. For a description of realms, see @ref{Realms}.
@item multiple-login
This message is returned to the user, who has logged in more than
allowed number of times. For description of how to set the maximum
number of concurrent logins, see @ref{Simultaneous-Use}.
@item second-login
This is a special case of @code{multiple-login}, which is used when
the user's login limit is 1.
@item timespan-violation
This message is returned to the user who is trying to login outside of
allowed time interval. For description of how to limit user's login
time, see @ref{Login-Time}.
@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node filters
@subsection @code{filters} statement
@kwindex filters
@kwindex filter
@kwindex auth
@kwindex acct
@kwindex common
@kwindex input-format
@kwindex wait-reply

The @code{filters} statement configures user-defined external filters.
@xref{Filters}, for the detailed discussion of external filters.

@subheading Syntax

@example
filters @{
        filter @var{ident} @{
                exec-path @var{path} ;
                error-log @var{filename} ;
                common @var{bool} [@var{max-wait}];
                auth @{
                        input-format @var{fmt} ;
                        wait-reply @var{bool} ;
                @};
                acct @{
                        input-format @var{fmt} ;
                        wait-reply @var{bool} ;
                @};
        @};
        @dots{}
@};
@end example

@noindent
Each @code{filter} directive defines a new filter. The @var{ident}
argument declares the name of the filter. This string must be
used in @attr{Exec-Program-Wait} or @attr{Acct-Ext-Program} attributes
to trigger invocation of this filter (@pxref{Exec-Program-Wait}).

@subheading Usage

@table @asis
@item exec-path @var{path}
Absolute path to the filter program.

@item error-log @var{filename}
Redirect error output from the filter program to @var{filename}. If the
@var{filename} does not start with a slash, it is taken relative to
the current logging directory (@pxref{option,log-dir}).

@item auth
@itemx acct

These compound statements define authentication and accounting
parts of this filter. Any one of them may be missing. The two
statements allowed within @code{auth} and @code{acct} blocks are:

@table @asis
@item input-format @var{fmt}
Format of the input line for this filter. Usually this string
uses %C@{@} notations (@pxref{Macro Substitution}).

You can also use the return value from a @code{rewrite} function as
input line to the filter. To do so, declare:

@example
        input-format "=my_func()";
@end example

@noindent
where @var{my_func} is the name of the rewrite function to invoke. The
function must return string value.

@item wait-reply @var{bool}
If the filter prints a single line of output for each input line, set
this to @code{yes}. Otherwise, if the filter produces no output, use
@code{wait-reply no}.
@end table

@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node mlc
@subsection @code{mlc} statement
@kwindex mlc
@kwindex sql
@kwindex system

@subheading Syntax

@example
mlc @{
        method (system|sql);
        checkrad-assume-logged @var{bool};
@};
@end example

@subheading Usage

@code{Mlc} statement configures multiple login checking subsystem
(@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}).

@table @asis
@item method
Sets the method of retrieving information about the currently open
sessions. Currently two methods are implemented. Setting @code{method}
to @code{system} will use system accounting database (@pxref{System
Accounting}). This is the default method. Setting it to @code{sql}
will use @sc{sql} database.

@item checkrad-assume-logged
@command{radiusd} consults the value of this variable when the @NAS{}
does not responds to checkrad queries (@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}).
If this variable is set to @code{yes}, the daemon will proceed as if
the @NAS{} returned ``yes'', i.e. it will assume the user is logged in.
Otherwise @command{radiusd} assumes the user @emph{is not} logged in.

@end table

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node dictionary file
@section Dictionary of Attributes --- @file{raddb/dictionary}
@cindex Radius dictionary
@cindex @file{dictionary} file

The dictionary file @file{raddb/dictionary} defines the symbolic names
for radius attributes and their values (@pxref{Attributes}). The file consists
of a series of statements, each statement occupies one line.

In the detailed discussion below we use the following meta-syntactic
characters:

@table @var
@item number
Denotes a decimal, octal or hexadecimal number. Usual C conventions are
honored, i.e. if @var{number} starts with @samp{0x} or @samp{0X} it is
read as a hex number, if it starts with @samp{0} it is read as an
octal number, otherwise it is read as a decimal one.
@item type
Denotes an attribute type. These are valid attribute types:

@table @code
@item string
A string type.
@item integer
An integer type.
@item ipaddr
@IP{} in a dotted-quad form.
@item date
A date in the format: "MON DD CCYY", where MON is the usual three-character
abbreviation, DD is day of month (1-31), CCYY is the year, including the
century.
@end table
@end table

@menu
* Comment::             Introducing a comment line.
* $INCLUDE::            Include a file.
* VENDOR::              Define a vendor-id.
* ATTRIBUTE::           Define an attribute translation.
* BEGIN::               Blocks of vendor-specific attributes
* ALIAS::               Define alternative name for an attribute.
* PROPERTY::            Define attribute properties.
* VALUE::               Define a value translation.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Comment
@subsection Comments
Comments are introduced by a pound sign (@samp{#}). Everything starting from
the first occurrence of @samp{#} up to the end of line is ignored.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node $INCLUDE
@subsection $INCLUDE Statement
@kwindex $INCLUDE (dictionary)

@subheading Syntax
@example
$INCLUDE @file{filename}
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{$INCLUDE} statement causes the contents of the file @file{filename}
to be read in and processed. The file is looked up in the Radius database
directory, unless its name starts with a slash.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node VENDOR
@subsection VENDOR Statement
@kwindex VENDOR

@subheading Syntax
@example
VENDOR  @var{vendor-name} @var{vendor-id}
@end example

@subheading Usage
A @code{VENDOR} statement defines the symbolic name @var{vendor-name}
for vendor identifier @var{vendor-id}.
This name can subsequently be used in @code{ATTRIBUTE} statements
to define Vendor-Specific attribute translations. @xref{Vendor-Specific}.

@subheading Example
@example
VENDOR  Livingston  307
@end example

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node ATTRIBUTE
@subsection ATTRIBUTE statement
@kwindex ATTRIBUTE
@subheading Syntax
@example
ATTRIBUTE  @var{name}  @var{number}  @var{type} [@var{vendor}] [@var{flags}]
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{ATTRIBUTE} statement defines the internal representation of
an attribute: its symbolic name, data type and syntactical usage.
Its parts have the following meaning:

@table @var
@item name
The attribute name.
@item number
The attribute @acronym{ID} (number).
@item type
The attribute type.
@item vendor
Vendor name for vendor-specific attributes. For usual attributes this
field is empty or contains a dash (@samp{-}). The latter usage is
for compatibility with previous version of GNU Radius
@item flags
Flags, defining attribute properties (@pxref{Attributes}).
@end table

The @dfn{attribute property flags} consist of a sequence of letters,
whose meaning is determined by the following rules:
@footnote{The @var{flags} are optional for compatibility with previous
versions of GNU Radius. If they are omitted, the default is @samp{[LRLRLR]+}}

@enumerate 1
@item
The attribute usage is described by three pairs of symbols, enclosed
in square brackets. Each pair describes how the attribute can be
used in each of three configuration files. The first pair corresponds
to @file{raddb/users}, the second one corresponds to @file{raddb/hints},
and the third one corresponds to @file{raddb/huntgroups}. Within each
pair, the letter @samp{L} in first position means that the attribute
is allowed in @LHS{} of a rule. The letter @samp{R} in second position
means that the attribute is allowed in @RHS{} of a rule. The absence of
any of these letters is indicated by dash (@samp{-}). Thus, the
following usage specification:

@example
        [L--RLR]
@end example
@noindent

means that the attribute may be used in @LHS{} of a rule in @file{raddb/users},
in @RHS{} of a rule in @file{raddb/hints}, and in both sides of a rule
in @file{raddb/huntgroups}.
@item
The attribute additivity is described by one of the following letters:
@table @asis
@item =
Additivity = Replace
@item +
Additivity = Append
@item N
Additivity = None
@end table
@item
The presence of letter @samp{P} in property flags raises the propagation
bit.
@item
Letter @samp{l} (lower-case ell) enables logging the given attribute
in detail file (@pxref{Detailed Request Accounting}). This is meaningful
only for internal attributes, i.e. the ones whose decimal value is
greater than 255 (@pxref{Radius Internal Attributes}). By default such
attributes do not appear in detailed logs. The flag @samp{l} reverts
this behavior.
@item
Letter @samp{E} marks attributes encrypted as described in RFC 2138.
Currently these are User-Password and CHAP-Password.
@item
Letter @samp{T} marks attribute encrypted according to RFC 2868.
@item
The characters from @samp{1} to @samp{9} denote nine user-defined flags
(@pxref{Extended Comparison}).
@end enumerate

@subheading Example

@example
ATTRIBUTE  Service-Type  6 integer - [LR-RLR]=P
@end example

This statement declares that the attribute number 6 will be referred
to by the symbolic name @samp{Service-Type}. The attribute is of
integer data type and it may be used  in any part of matching rules,
except in @LHS{} of a @file{raddb/hints} rule. The
additivity of @attr{Service-Type} is set to @samp{Replace}. The
attribute will be propagated through the proxy chain.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node BEGIN
@subsection Blocks of Vendor-Specific Attributes
@kwindex BEGIN
@kwindex END
@kwindex BEGIN-VENDOR
@kwindex END-VENDOR

@subheading Syntax
@example
@group
BEGIN VENDOR @var{vendor-name} [@var{vendor-id}]
@dots{}
END
@end group
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{BEGIN} keyword marks start of the block of definitions of
vendor-specific attributes. The block is terminated by @code{END}
keyword, optionally followed by an arbitrary number of words,
which are regarded as a comment. The block may contain any valid
dictionary declarations, except other blocks: nesting of declaration
blocks is not allowed.

If @var{vendor-id} is absent, the value of vendor ID is looked
up in the internal table of vendors; therefore, it must be
defined before @code{BEGIN} statement (@pxref{VENDOR}).

@code{BEGIN---END} block alters the handling of @code{ATTRIBUTE}
statements within it. If @code{ATTRIBUTE} statement does not
contain an explicit vendor-id specification, the value of
@var{vendor-id} is used instead.

For compatibility with FreeRadius an alternative syntax is also
supported:

@example
@group
BEGIN-VENDOR @var{vendor-name}
@dots{}
END-VENDOR @var{vendor-name}
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Such compatibility blocks must appear only after the declaration of
@var{vendor-name} (@pxref{VENDOR}).

@subheading Example

The following is the usual way of defining vendor-specific attributes:

@example
@group
VENDOR          Livingston      307

ATTRIBUTE       LE-Terminate-Detail     2       string  Livingston
ATTRIBUTE       LE-Advice-of-Charge     3       string  Livingston
@end group
@end example

@noindent
The following two examples show the alternative ways:

@example
@group
VENDOR Livingston 307
BEGIN VENDOR Livingston
ATTRIBUTE       LE-Terminate-Detail     2       string
ATTRIBUTE       LE-Advice-of-Charge     3       string
END
@end group
@end example

@example
@group
BEGIN VENDOR Livingston 307
ATTRIBUTE       LE-Terminate-Detail     2       string
ATTRIBUTE       LE-Advice-of-Charge     3       string
END
@end group
@end example

@noindent
These three examples are completely equivalent to each other.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node ALIAS
@subsection ALIAS statement
@kwindex ALIAS
@subheading Syntax
@example
ALIAS @var{name}  @var{alt-name}
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{ALIAS} statement defines an alternative name @var{alt-name}
for attribute @var{name}. The latter should already be defined,
otherwise an error occurs.

@subheading Example

@example
ALIAS User-Password Password
@end example

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node PROPERTY
@subsection PROPERTY statement
@kwindex PROPERTY
@subheading Syntax
@example
PROPERTY  @var{name}  @var{flags}
PROPERTY  @var{name}  +@var{flags} [-@var{flags} ...]
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{PROPERTY} statement redefines property flags for attribute
@var{name}. The attribute must be defined, otherwise an error occurs.
The @code{PROPERTY} statement has two forms. In first form, it takes
a single argument, representing new property flags for the attribute.
In its second form it takes any number of arguments, each of them
preceded by @samp{+} sign, indicating addition of properties, or
by @samp{-} sign, indicating removal of these.

@xref{ATTRIBUTE}, for the discussion of attribute property flags.

@subheading Example

The following example defines that the attribute @attr{User-Password}
may be used only on left-hand side of a @file{raddb/users} entry, and
that it is transmitted in encrypted form.

@example
PROPERTY  User-Password [L-----]E
@end example

@noindent
Next example illustrates adding and removing attribute properties:

@example
PROPERTY  My-Attrib     +P -=
@end example

@noindent
it adds propagation bit (@samp{P}) and removes @samp{replace}
additivity from @attr{My-Attrib} attribute.


@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node VALUE
@subsection VALUE Statement
@kwindex VALUE

@subheading Syntax
@example
VALUE   Attribute-Translation       Value-Translation       @var{number}
@end example

@subheading Usage
The @code{VALUE} statement assigns a translation string to a given
value of an integer attribute. @code{Attribute-Translation} specifies
the attribute and the @code{Value-Translation} specifies the name
assigned to the value @var{number} of this attribute.

@subheading Example

The following assigns the translation string @samp{Login-User} to
the value 1 of the attribute @samp{Service-Type}.

@example
VALUE  Service-Type  Login-User  1
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node clients file
@section Clients List --- @file{raddb/clients}
@cindex @file{clients} file
@cindex @file{raddb/clients} file

The @file{raddb/clients} lists @NAS{}es which are allowed to make
authentication requests. As usual, the @samp{#} character introduces a
comment. Each record in the file consists of two fields, separated
by whitespace. The fields are:

@table @asis
@item NAS name
Specifies a hostname or @IP{} of the @NAS{}.
@item Key
Lists the encryption key shared between the server and this @NAS{}.
@end table

If the set of @NAS{}es share the same encryption key, there are two
ways to list it in @file{raddb/clients}. First, if these @NAS{}es
lie in a single network, you can specify this network address in
@code{NAS name} field, e.g.:

@example
10.10.10.0/27   seCRet
@end example

Notice also that specifying full netmask after the @samp{/} character is
also allowed, so that the above example could also be written as follows:

@example
10.10.10.0/255.255.255.224   seCRet
@end example

Otherwise, the keyword DEFAULT may be used as @code{NAS name}. This
notation will match any @IP{}, so it should be used with caution.

@menu
* Example: clients example.     An example of clients file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node clients example
@subsection Example of @file{clients} file
@exindex @file{clients} file

@example
# This is a list of clients which are allowed to make authentication
# requests.
# Each record consists of two fields:
#       i.  Valid hostname.
#       ii. The shared encryption key for this hostname.
#
#Client Name            Key
#----------------       -------------------
myhost.dom.ain          guessme
merlin                  emrys
11.10.10.10             secRet
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node  naslist file
@section NAS List --- @file{raddb/naslist}
@cindex @file{naslist} file
@cindex @file{raddb/naslist} file
@cindex MAX Ascend, broken passwords

The @file{raddb/naslist} file contains a list of @NAS{}es known to the Radius
server. Each record in the file consist of the following four fields,
the first two being mandatory, the last two being optional:

@table @asis
@item NAS name
Specifies either a hostname or @IP{} for a single @NAS{} or a CIDR net block
address for a set of @NAS{}es. The word @samp{DEFAULT} may
be used in this field to match any @NAS{}. @footnote{Logins from DEFAULT @NAS{}es are not reflected in SNMP variables.}

@item Short Name
This field defines a short name under which this @NAS{} will be listed
in logfiles. The short name is also used as a name of the subdirectory
where the detailed logs are stored.

@item Type
Specifies the type of this @NAS{}. Using this value @command{radiusd}
determines the way to query @NAS{} about the presence of a given user on it
(@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}).
The two special types: @samp{true} and @samp{false}, can be used to
disable @NAS{} querying. When the type field contains @samp{true},
@command{radiusd} assumes the user is logged in to the @NAS{}, when it
contains @samp{false}, @command{radiusd} assumes the user @emph{is not}
logged in. Otherwise, the type
is used as a link to @file{nastypes} entry (@pxref{nastypes file}).

If this field is not present @samp{true} is assumed.

@item Arguments
Additional arguments describing the @NAS{}. Multiple arguments
must be separated by commas. No intervening whitespace is allowed in
this field.
@end table

There are two groups of nas arguments: @dfn{nas-specific} arguments and
@dfn{nas-querying} arguments. @dfn{Nas-specific} arguments are used to
modify a behavior of @command{radiusd} when sending or receiving the
information to or from a particular @NAS{}.

@dfn{Nas-querying} arguments control the way @command{radiusd} queries
a @NAS{} for confirmation of a user's session (@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}). These arguments override the ones specified in
@file{nastypes} and can thus be used to override the default
values.

The @dfn{nas-specific} arguments currently implemented are:

@table @asis
@item broken_pass
This is a boolean argument that controls the encryption of user
passwords, longer than 16 octets. By default, @command{radiusd} uses
method specified by @sc{rfc 2865}. However some @NAS{}es, most notably
@sc{max a}scend series, implement a broken method of encoding long
passwords. This flag instructs @command{radiusd} to use broken method
of password encryption for the given @NAS{}.

@item compare-auth-flag=@var{flag}
Instructs radius to use attributes marked with a given user-defined flag
when comparing authentication requests. It overrides
@code{compare-attribute-flag} (@pxref{auth}) for this particular @NAS{}.
@xref{Extended Comparison}, for a detailed description of its usage.

@item compare-acct-flag=@var{flag}
Instructs radius to use attributes marked with a given user-defined flag
when comparing accounting requests. It overrides
@code{compare-attribute-flag} (@pxref{acct}) for this particular @NAS{}.
@xref{Extended Comparison}, for a detailed description of its usage.
@end table

@xref{Checking Duplicates}, for general description of request
comparison methods.

For the list of nas-querying arguments,
@xref{nastypes file,,Full list of allowed arguments}.

@menu
* Example: naslist example.     Example of @file{naslist} file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node naslist example
@subsection Example of @file{naslist} file
@exindex @file{naslist} file

@example
# raddb/naslist: contains a list of Network Access Servers
#
# Each record consists of following fields:
#
#       i.      A valid hostname or IP address for the client.
#       ii.     The short name to use in the logfiles for this NAS.
#       iii.    Type of device. Valid values are `true', `false' and
#               those defined in raddb/nastypes file.

# NAS Name              Short Name      Type
#----------------       ----------      ----
myhost.dom.ain          myhost          unix
merlin                  merlin          max
11.10.10.10             arthur          livingston
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node nastypes file
@section NAS Types --- @file{raddb/nastypes}
@cindex @file{nastypes} file

The @file{raddb/nastypes} file describes the ways to
query @NAS{}es about active user sessions.

@menu
* Syntax: nastypes syntax.      Syntax described.
* Example: nastypes example.    Example of nastypes file.
* Predefined NAS Types::        @NAS{} types defined in standard nastypes file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node nastypes syntax
@subsection Syntax of @file{raddb/nastypes}
@cindex @file{nastypes} file, syntax of
@cindex Syntax of @file{nastypes}
@UNREVISED{}

@heading Syntax
Each record consists of three fields separated by any amount of
whitespace. The fields are:

@table @asis
@item Type
Type of the @NAS{} which is described in this record.
@item Method
Method to use to query a @NAS{} of given type.
@item Arguments
Arguments to pass to this method. Each argument is a pair
@var{arg}=@var{value}, where @var{arg} is its name and @var{value} is
a value assigned to it. The list of predefined argument names follows.
Note, that no intervening whitespace is allowed in this
field.
@end table

@heading Methods

Version @value{VERSION} of GNU Radius supports following querying methods:
@code{finger}, @code{snmp}, @code{external} and @code{guile}.
@FIXME{Describe these fully.}

@heading Arguments

In the discussion below @var{n} means numeric and @var{s} string value.

The following arguments are predefined:

@subheading Common for all methods

@table @asis
@item function=@var{s}
Specifies the check function to use with this method
(@pxref{Login Verification Functions}).
This argument must be present. For description of how this function is
applied, see @ref{Multiple Login Checking}.
@item port=@var{n}
Use port number @var{n} instead of the default for the given method.
@end table

@subheading Method snmp

@table @asis

@item password=@var{s}
Use community @var{s} instead of the default. This argument must be
present.
@item retries=@var{n}
Retry @var{n} times before giving up.
@item timeout=@var{n}
Timeout @var{n} seconds on each retry.
@end table

@subheading Method finger

@table @asis
@item timeout=@var{n}
Give up if the @NAS{} does not respond within @var{n} seconds.
@item notcp
@itemx tcp=0
Disable the use of T/TCP for hosts with a broken TCP implementation.
@item arg=@var{subst}
Send @var{subst} to finger, instead of username. @var{subst} must be
one of @dfn{macro variables}, described below.
@end table

@subheading Macro variables

The following macro-variables are recognized and substituted when
encountered in the @var{value} pair of an argument:
@FIXME{Describe new syntax for extendable strings. Notice, that the
use of old meta-characters is deprecated.}

@table @samp
@item %u
Expands to username.
@item %s
Expands to session id.
@item %d
Expands to session id converted to decimal representation.
@item %p
Expands to port number.
@item %P
Expands to port number + 1.
@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node nastypes example
@subsection Example of nastypes file.
@exindex @file{nastypes} file

Note, that in the following example the long lines are
broken into several lines for readability.

@example
# Type     Method          Args
# ----     ------          ----
unix       finger       function=check_unix
max-f      finger       function=check_max_finger
max        snmp         oid=.1.3.6.1.4.1.529.12.3.1.4.%d,
                        function=check_snmp_u
as5300-f   finger       function=check_as5300_finger
as5300     snmp         oid=.1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.150.1.1.3.1.2.%d,
                        function=check_snmp_u
livingston snmp         oid=.1.3.6.1.4.1.307.3.2.1.1.1.5.%P,
                        function=check_snmp_s
@end example

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Predefined NAS Types
@subsection Standard @NAS{} types
@cindex NAS types, standard

The @file{nastypes} shipped with version @value{VERSION} of GNU Radius
defines following @NAS{} types:

@table @asis
@item unix --- UNIX boxes running Finger
This type suits for @sc{unix} boxes running finger service able to return information
about dial-up users active on them. To enable finger checking of a unix
host add following to your @file{naslist} file:
@example
@group
#Hostname       Shortname   Type
#--------       ---------   ----
nas.name        T           unix
@end group
@end example

@item max-f --- MAX Ascend with Finger
Use this type if you have MAX Ascend terminal server that answers finger
queries. The @file{naslist} entry for such a @NAS{} will look like:

@example
@group
#Hostname       Shortname   Type  Flags
#--------       ---------   ----  -----
nas.name        T           max-f broken_pass
@end group
@end example

Note the use of @code{broken_pass} flag. It is needed
for most MAX Ascend servers (@pxref{naslist file}).

@item max --- MAX Ascend, answering SNMP
Use this type if you have MAX Ascend terminal server that answers SNMP
queries. The @file{naslist} entry for such @NAS{} will look like:

@example
@group
#Hostname       Shortname   Type  Flags
#--------       ---------   ----  -----
nas.name        T           max-f broken_pass,community=@var{comm}
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Replace @var{comm} with your actual SNMP community name.

@item as5300-f --- Cisco AS5300 running finger

@item as5300   --- Cisco AS5300 answering SNMP

@item livingston --- Livingston Portmaster
Type @code{livingston} queries portmaster using SNMP.
@end table

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node hints file
@section Request Processing Hints --- @file{raddb/hints}
@cindex Hints
@cindex @file{hints} file
@cindex @file{raddb/hints} file

The @file{raddb/hints} file is used to modify the contents of the incoming
request depending on the username. For a detailed description of this,
@xref{Hints}.

The file contains data in @dfn{Matching Rule} format (@pxref{Matching
Rule}).

Notice, that versions of GNU Radius up to 1.0 allowed to use only
a subset of attributes in the check list of a @file{hints} entry,
namely:

@itemize @bullet
@item @attr{Suffix}
@item @attr{Prefix}
@item @attr{Group}
@item @attr{User-ID}
@end itemize

@noindent
This requirement has been removed in version 1.0.

@menu
* Example: hints example.       An example of @file{hints} file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node hints example
@subsection Example of @file{hints} file
@exindex @file{hints} file

@example
## If the username starts with `U', append the UUCP hint
DEFAULT         Prefix = "U", Strip-User-Name = No
                Hint = "UUCP"
## If the username ends with `.slip', append the SLIP service data
## and remove the suffix from the user name.
DEFAULT         Suffix = ".slip",
                   Strip-User-Name = Yes
                Hint = "SLIP",
                   Service-Type = Framed-User,
                   Framed-Protocol = SLIP
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node huntgroups file
@section Huntgroups --- @file{raddb/huntgroups}
@cindex Huntgroups
@cindex @file{huntgroups} file
@cindex @file{raddb/huntgroups} file

The @file{raddb/huntgroups} contains the definitions of the
huntgroups. For a detailed description of huntgroup concept,
@xref{Huntgroups}.

The file contains data in @dfn{Matching Rule} format (@pxref{Matching Rule}).

@menu
* Example: huntgroups example.   An example of the @file{huntgroups} file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node huntgroups example
@subsection Example of @file{huntgroups} file.
@exindex @file{huntgroups} file

@example
## This defines the packet rewriting function for the server 11.10.10.11
DEFAULT NAS-IP-Address = 11.10.10.11, Rewrite-Function = "max_fixup"
        NULL
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node realms file
@section List of Proxy Realms --- @file{raddb/realms}
@cindex @file{realms} file
@cindex @file{raddb/realms} file
@cindex @samp{NOREALM}, special realm name

The @file{raddb/realms} file lists remote Radius servers that are allowed to
communicate with the local Radius server (@pxref{Proxying}).

Each record consists of up to three fields, separated by whitespace.
Two of them are mandatory. The fields are:

@table @asis
@item Realm name
Specifies the name of the realm being defined, i.e. part of the login
name after the @samp{@@} symbol. There are three special forms of this
field.

The name @samp{NOREALM} defines the empty realm, i.e. lines
marked with this name will match user names without any realm suffix.

The name @samp{DEFAULT} defines the default realm
(@pxref{Realms}). The lines with this realm name will match any user
name, not matched by any other line in @file{raddb/realms}.

@item Remote server list

A comma-separated list of remote servers to which the requests for this realm
should be forwarded. Each item in the list is:

@example
@var{servername}[:@var{auth-port}[:@var{acct-port}]]
@end example
@noindent

Optional @var{auth-port} and @var{acct-port} are the authentication and
accounting port numbers. If @var{acct-port} is omitted, it is computed
as @var{auth-port} + 1. If @var{auth-port} is omitted, the default
authentication port number is used.

The servers from this list are tried in turn until any of them replies
or the list is exhausted, whichever occurs first. The timeout value and
number of retries for each server are set via @code{timeout} and
@code{retry} flags (see below).

There may be cases where you would wish a particular realm to be
served by the server itself. It is tempting to write

@example
# @emph{Wrong!}
realm.name      localhost
@end example

@noindent
however, this will not work. The special form of the server list is
provided for this case. It is the word @samp{LOCAL}. The correct
configuration line for the above case will thus be:

@example
# Use this to declare a locally handled realm
realm.nam       LOCAL
@end example

@item Flags (optional)
@end table

The flags meaningful in @file{raddb/realms} are

@table @asis
@item ignorecase
Boolean value. When set, enables case-insensitive comparison of
realm names. For example, if a realm were defined as

@example
myrealm.net     remote.server.net:1812  ignorecase
@end example

@noindent
then user name @samp{user@@MyREAlm.NeT} will match this definition.

@item strip
Boolean value. Controls whether the realm name should be stripped off
the username before forwarding the request to the remote server. Setting
@code{strip} enables stripping, setting @code{nostrip} disables
it. Default is to always strip user names.

@item quota=@var{num}
Set maximum number of concurrent logins allowed from this realm to
the given value (@var{num}).

@item timeout
Number of seconds to wait for reply from the remote server before
retransmitting the request.

@item retries
Number of attempts to connect a server. If the server does not
respond after the last attempt, the next server from the list
is tried.

@item auth
Proxy only authentication requests.

@item acct
Proxy only accounting requests.
@end table

@menu
* Example: realms example.      An example of @file{realms} file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node realms example
@subsection Example of @file{realms} file
@exindex @file{realms} file

@subheading Example 1.

@example
@group
# Realm                 Remote server[:port]            flags
#----------------       ---------------------           --------
that.net                radius.that.net                 nostrip
dom.ain                 server.dom.ain:3000             strip,quota=20
remote.net              srv1.remote.net,srv2.remote.net
@end group
@end example

@subheading Example 2.

@example
@group
# Realm                 Remote server[:port]            flags
#----------------       ---------------------           --------
NOREALM                 radius.server.net
that.net                radius.that.net                 nostrip
dom.ain                 server.dom.ain:3000             strip,quota=20
@end group
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node users file
@section User Profiles --- @file{raddb/users}
@cindex @file{users} file
@cindex @file{raddb/users} file

File @file{raddb/users} contains the list of @dfn{User Profiles}.
@xref{User Profiles}, for a description of its purpose.

@menu
* Example: users example.       An example of @file{users} file.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node users example
@subsection Example of @file{users} file
@exindex @file{users} file

@example
@group
## The following entry is matched when the user appends ``.ppp'' to his
## username when logging in.
## The suffix is removed from the user name, then the password is
## looked up in the SQL database.
## Users may log in at any time. They get PPP service.
DEFAULT Suffix = ".ppp",
                Auth-Type = SQL,
                Login-Time = "Al",
                Simultaneous-Use = 1,
                Strip-User-Name = Yes
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = PPP
@end group

@group
## This is for SLIP users.
## This entry is matched when the auth request matches ``SLIP'' hint
DEFAULT Hint = "SLIP",
                Auth-Type = Mysql
        Service-Type = Framed-User
                Framed-Protocol = SLIP
@end group

@group
## The following authenticates users using system passwd files.
## The users are allowed to log in from 7:55 to 23:05 on any weekday,
## except the weekend, and from 07:55 to 12:00 on Sunday.
## Only one login is allowed per user.
## The program telauth is used to further check the authentication
## information and provide the reply pairs
## Note the use of backslashes to split a long line.
DEFAULT Auth-Type = System,
                Login-Time = "Wk0755-2305,Su0755-1200",
                Simultaneous-Use = 1
        Exec-Program-Wait = "/usr/local/sbin/telauth \
                             %C@{User-Name@} \
                             %C@{Calling-Station-Id@} \
                             %C@{NAS-IP-Address@} \
                             %C@{NAS-Port-Id@}"
@end group

@group
## This particular user is authenticated via PAM. He is presented a
## choice from @file{raddb/menus/menu1} file.
gray    Auth-Type = Pam
        Menu = menu1
@end group
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node access.deny file
@section List of Blocked Users --- @file{raddb/access.deny}
@cindex @file{access.deny} file
@cindex @file{raddb/access.deny} file

The @file{raddb/access.deny} file contains a list of user names which are
not allowed to log in via Radius. Each user name is listed on a
separate line. As usual, the @samp{#} character introduces an end-of-line
comment.

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node sqlserver file
@section SQL Configuration --- @file{raddb/sqlserver}
@cindex @file{sqlserver} file.
@cindex @file{raddb/sqlserver} file.

The @file{raddb/sqlserver} file configures the connection to @sc{sql} server.

The file uses simple line-oriented @samp{@var{keyword} --- @var{value}}
format. Comments are introduced by @samp{#} character.

The @file{sqlserver} statements can logically be subdivided into
following groups: @dfn{SQL Client Parameters}, configuring the
connection between @sc{sql} client and the server, @dfn{Authentication
Server Parameters}, @dfn{Authorization Parameters}, and
@dfn{Accounting server parameters}.

@menu
* SQL Client Parameters::
* Authentication Server Parameters::
* Authorization Parameters::
* Accounting server parameters::
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node SQL Client Parameters
@subsection SQL Client Parameters

These parameters configure various aspects of connection between
@sc{sql} client and the server.

@table @code
@item interface @var{iface-type}
Specifies the @sc{sql} interface to use. Currently supported values
for @var{iface-type} are @code{mysql} and @code{postgres}. Depending
on this, the default communication port number is set: it is 3306 for
@code{interface mysql} and 5432 for @code{interface postgres}. Use of
this statement is only meaningful when the package was configured with
both @option{--with-mysql} and @option{--with-postgres} option.
@item server @var{string}
Specifies the hostname or @IP{} of the @sc{sql} server.
@item port @var{number}
Sets the @sc{sql} communication port number. It can be omitted if your
server uses the default port.
@item login @var{string}
Sets the @sc{sql} user login name.
@item password @var{password}
Sets the @sc{sql} user password.
@item keepopen @var{bool}
Specify whether @command{radiusd} should try to keep the connection open.
When set to no (the default), @command{radiusd} will open new connection
before the transaction and close it right after finishing it.
We recommend setting @code{keepopen} to @code{yes} for heavily loaded
servers, since opening the new connection can take a substantial amount
of time and slow down the operation considerably.
@item idle_timeout @var{number}
Set idle timeout in seconds for an open @sc{sql} connection.
The connection is closed if it remains inactive longer that this amount
of time.
@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Authentication Server Parameters
@subsection Authentication Server Parameters
@kwindex doauth
@kwindex auth_db
@kwindex auth_query
@kwindex group_query
@kwindex auth_success_query
@kwindex auth_failure_query
@UNREVISED{}

These parameters configure the @sc{sql} authentication. The general
syntax is:

@table @code
@item doauth @var{bool}
When set to @code{yes}, enables authentication via @sc{sql}. All @code{auth_}
keywords are ignored if @code{doauth} is set to @code{no}.

@item auth_db @var{string}
Specifies the name of the database containing authentication information.

@item auth_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be used to obtain user's password from the
database. The query should return exactly one string value --- the
password.

@item group_query @var{string}
Specifies the query that retrieves the list of user groups the user
belongs to. This query is used when @attr{Group} or @attr{Group-Name}
attribute appears in the @LHS{} of a user's or hint's profile.

@item auth_success_query @var{string}
This query is executed when an authentication
succeeds. @xref{Auth Probing}, for the detailed
discussion of its purpose.

@item auth_failure_query @var{string}
This query is executed upon an authentication
failure. @xref{Auth Probing}, for the detailed
discussion of its purpose.

@end table

@subheading Example of Authentication Server Parameters

Let's suppose the authentication information is kept in the tables
@code{passwd} and @code{groups}.

The @code{passwd} table contains user passwords. A user is allowed
to have different passwords for different services. The table structure
is:

@example
@group
CREATE TABLE passwd (
  user_name           varchar(32) binary default '' not null,
  service             char(16) default 'Framed-PPP' not null,
  password            char(64)
);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Additionally, the table @code{groups} contains information about
user groups a particular user belongs to. Its structure is:

@example
@group
CREATE TABLE groups (
  user_name           char(32) binary default '' not null,
  user_group          char(32)
);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
The queries used to retrieve the information from these tables will
then look like:

@example
@group
auth_query  SELECT password
            FROM passwd
            WHERE user_name = '%C@{User-Name@}'
            AND service = '%C@{Auth-Data@}'

group_query SELECT user_group
            FROM groups
            WHERE user_name = '%C@{User-Name@}'
@end group
@end example

It is supposed, that the information about the particular service a
user is wishing to obtain, will be kept in @attr{Auth-Data} attribute
in @LHS{} of a user's profile.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Authorization Parameters
@subsection Authorization Parameters

These parameters define queries used to retrieve the authorization
information from the @sc{sql} database. All the queries refer to
the authentication database.

@table @code
@item check_attr_query @var{string}
This query must return a list of triplets:

@example
@var{attr-name}, @var{attr-value}, @var{opcode}
@end example

@noindent
The query is executed before comparing the request with the profile
entry. The values returned by the query are added to @LHS{} of the
entry. @var{opcode} here means one of valid operation codes:
@samp{=}, @samp{!=}, @samp{<}, @samp{>}, @samp{<=},
@samp{>=}.

@item reply_attr_query @var{string}
This query must return pairs:

@example
@var{attr-name}, @var{attr-value}
@end example

@noindent
The query is executed after a successful match, the values it
returns are added to the @RHS{} list of the matched entry, and are
therefore returned to the @NAS{} in the reply packet.
@end table

@subheading Example of Authorization Parameters

Suppose your attribute information is stored in a @sc{sql} table of
the following structure:

@example
@group
CREATE TABLE attrib (
  user_name varchar(32) default '' not null,
  attr      char(32) default '' not null,
  value     char(128),
  op enum("=", "!=", "<", ">", "<=", ">=") default null
);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Each row of the table contains the attribute-value pair for a given
user. If @code{op} field is @code{NULL}, the row describes @RHS{}
(reply) pair. Otherwise, it describes a @LHS{} (check) pair. The
authorization queries for this table will look as follows:

@example
@group
check_attr_query  SELECT attr,value,op \
                  FROM attrib \
                  WHERE user_name='%u' \
                  AND op IS NOT NULL

reply_attr_query  SELECT attr,value \
                  FROM attrib \
                  WHERE user_name='%u' \
                  AND op IS NULL
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Now, let's suppose the @file{raddb/users} contains only one entry:

@example
@group
DEFAULT Auth-Type = SQL
        Service-Type = Framed-User
@end group
@end example

@noindent
And the @code{attrib} table contains following rows:

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .30 .25 .10
@item user_name @tab attr @tab value @tab op
@item @code{jsmith} @tab @code{NAS-IP-Address} @tab @code{10.10.10.1} @tab
@code{=}
@item @code{jsmith} @tab @code{NAS-Port-Id} @tab @code{20} @tab @code{<=}
@item @code{jsmith} @tab @code{Framed-Protocol} @tab @code{PPP} @tab @code{NULL}
@item @code{jsmith} @tab @code{Framed-IP-Address} @tab @code{10.10.10.11} @tab @code{NULL}
@end multitable

@noindent
Then, when the user @code{jsmith} is trying to authenticate, the
following happens:

@enumerate 1
@item
Radius finds the matching entry (@code{DEFAULT}) in the
@file{raddb/users}.
@item
It queries the database using the @code{check_attr_query}. The
triplets it returns are then added to the @LHS{} of the profile
entry. Thus, the @LHS{} will contain:

@example
@group
Auth-Type = SQL,
NAS-IP-Address = 10.10.10.1,
NAS-Port-Id <= 20
@end group
@end example
@item
Radius compares the incoming request with the @LHS{} pairs thus
obtained. If the comparison fails, it rejects the authentication.
Note that the @attr{Auth-Type} attributes itself
triggers execution of @code{auth_query}, described in the previous
section.
@item
After a successful authentication, Radius queries the database,
using @code{reply_attr_query}, and adds its return to the list
of @RHS{} pairs. The @RHS{} pairs will then be:

@example
@group
Service-Type = Framed-User,
Framed-Protocol = PPP,
Framed-IP-Address = 10.10.10.11
@end group
@end example

This list is returned to the @NAS{} along with the authentication
accept packet.
@end enumerate

Thus, this configuration allows the user @code{jsmith} to use only
@NAS{} 10.10.10.1, ports from 1 to 20 inclusive. If the user meets
these conditions, he is allowed to use @sc{ppp} service, and is
assigned @IP{} @code{10.10.10.11}.


@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Accounting server parameters
@subsection Accounting Parameters

To perform the @sc{sql} accounting @command{radiusd} needs to know the
database where it is to store the accounting information. This
information is supplied by the following statements:

@table @code
@item doacct @var{bool}
When set to @code{yes} enables @sc{sql} accounting. All @code{acct_}
keywords are ignored if @code{doacct} is set to @code{no}.
@item acct_db @var{string}
Specifies the name of the database where the accounting information is
to be stored.
@end table

Further, @command{radiusd} needs to know which information it is
to store into the database and when. Each of five accounting request
types (@pxref{Accounting Requests}) has a @sc{sql} query associated with
it. Thus, when radius receives an accounting request, it determines
the query to use by the value of @attr{Acct-Status-Type} attribute.

Following statements define the accounting queries:

@table @code
@item acct_start_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be used when @dfn{Session Start Packet}
is received. Typically, this would be some @code{INSERT} statement
(@pxref{Queries}).
@item acct_stop_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be used when @dfn{Session Stop Packet}
is received. Typically, this would be some @code{UPDATE} statement.
@item acct_stop_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be executed upon arrival of a
@dfn{Keepalive Packet}. Typically, this would be some @code{UPDATE} statement.
@item acct_nasup_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be used upon arrival of an
@dfn{Accounting Off Packet}.
@item acct_nasdown_query @var{string}
Specifies the @sc{sql} query to be used when a @NAS{} sends
@dfn{Accounting On Packet}.
@end table

None of these queries should return any values.

Three queries are designed for use by multiple login checking
mechanism (@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}):

@table @code
@item mlc_user_query @var{string}
A query retrieving a list of sessions currently opened by the given user.
@item mlc_realm_query @var{string}
A query to retrieve a list of sessions currently open for the given realm.
@item mlc_stop_query @var{string}
A query to mark given record as @dfn{hung}.
@end table

@menu
* Queries::                     Writing SQL accounting query templates.
@end menu

@comment ***L4**************************************************************
@node Queries
@subsubsection Writing SQL Accounting Query Templates
@cindex SQL accounting query templates
@cindex Writing SQL accounting query templates
@cindex SQL accounting query templates, writing of

Let's suppose you have an accounting table of the following structure:

@example
@group
CREATE TABLE calls (
  status              int(3),
  user_name           char(32),
  event_date_time     datetime DEFAULT '0000-00-00 00:00:00' NOT NULL,
  nas_ip_address      char(17),
  nas_port_id         int(6),
  acct_session_id     char(16) DEFAULT '' NOT NULL,
  acct_session_time   int(11),
  acct_input_octets   int(11),
  acct_output_octets  int(11),
  connect_term_reason int(4),
  framed_ip_address   char(17),
  called_station_id   char(32),
  calling_station_id  char(32)
);
@end group
@end example

On receiving the @dfn{Session Start Packet} we would insert a record into this
table with @code{status} set to 1. At this point the columns
@code{acct_session_time}, @code{acct_input_octets},
@code{acct_output_octets} as well as @code{connect_term_reason} are
unknown, so we will set them to 0:

@example
@group
# Query to be used on session start
acct_start_query     INSERT INTO calls \
                     VALUES(%C@{Acct-Status-Type@},\
                            '%u',\
                            '%G',\
                            '%C@{NAS-IP-Address@}',\
                            %C@{NAS-Port-Id@},\
                            '%C@{Acct-Session-Id@}',\
                            0,\
                            0,\
                            0,\
                            0,\
                            '%C@{Framed-IP-Address@}',\
                            '%C@{Called-Station-Id@}',\
                            '%C@{Calling-Station-Id@}')
@end group
@end example

Then, when the @dfn{Session Stop Packet} request arrives we will look up
the record having @code{status} = 1, @code{user_name} matching the
value of @attr{User-Name} attribute, and @code{acct_session_id} matching
that of @attr{Acct-Session-Id} attribute. Once the record is found,
we will update it, setting

@example
@group
status = 2
acct_session_time = value of Acct-Session-Time attribute
acct_input_octets = value of Acct-Input-Octets attribute
acct_output_octets = value of Acct-Output-Octets attribute
connect_term_reason = value of Acct-Terminate-Cause attribute
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Thus, every record with @code{status} = 1 will represent the active
session and every record with @code{status} = 2 will represent
the finished and correctly closed record. The constructed
@code{acct_stop_query} is then:

@example
@group
# Query to be used on session end
acct_stop_query      UPDATE calls \
                     SET status=%C@{Acct-Status-Type@},\
                         acct_session_time=%C@{Acct-Session-Time@},\
                         acct_input_octets=%C@{Acct-Input-Octets@},\
                         acct_output_octets=%C@{Acct-Output-Octets@},\
                         connect_term_reason=%C@{Acct-Terminate-Cause@} \
                     WHERE user_name='%C@{User-Name@}' \
                     AND status = 1 \
                     AND acct_session_id='%C@{Acct-Session-Id@}'
@end group
@end example

Upon receiving a @dfn{Keepalive Packet} we will update the information
stored with @code{acct_start_query}:

@example
@group
acct_alive_query  UPDATE calls \
                  SET acct_session_time=%C@{Acct-Session-Time@},\
                      acct_input_octets=%C@{Acct-Input-Octets@},\
                      acct_output_octets=%C@{Acct-Output-Octets@},\
                      framed_ip_address=%C@{Framed-IP-Address@} \
                  WHERE user_name='%C@{User-Name@}' \
                  AND status = 1 \
                  AND acct_session_id='%C@{Acct-Session-Id@}'
@end group
@end example

Further, there may be times when it is necessary to bring some @NAS{}
down. To correctly close the currently active sessions on this @NAS{}
we will define a @code{acct_nasdown_query} so that it would
set @code{status} column to 2 and update @code{acct_session_time}
in all records having @code{status} = 1 and
@code{nas_ip_address} equal to @IP{} of the @NAS{}. Thus, all
sessions on a given @NAS{} will be closed correctly when it brought
down. The @code{acct_session_time} can be computed as difference
between the current time and the time stored in @code{event_date_time}
column:

@example
@group
# Query to be used when a NAS goes down, i.e. when it sends
# Accounting-Off packet
acct_nasdown_query UPDATE calls \
                   SET status=2,\
                       acct_session_time=unix_timestamp(now())-\
                               unix_timestamp(event_date_time) \
                   WHERE status=1 \
                   AND nas_ip_address='%C@{NAS-IP-Address@}'
@end group
@end example

We have not covered only one case: when a @NAS{} crashes, e.g. due to
a power failure. In this case it does not have a time to send
@code{Accounting-Off} request and all its records remain open. But when
the power supply is restored, the @NAS{} will send an
@dfn{Accounting On packet}, so we define a @code{acct_nasup_query} to
set @code{status} column to 3 and update @code{acct_session_time}
in all open records belonging to this @NAS{}. Thus we will know that
each record having @code{status} = 3 represents a crashed session.
The query constructed will be:

@example
@group
# Query to be used when a NAS goes up, i.e. when it sends
# Accounting-On packet
acct_nasup_query   UPDATE calls \
                   SET status=3,\
                       acct_session_time=unix_timestamp(now())-\
                               unix_timestamp(event_date_time) \
                   WHERE status=1 \
                   AND nas_ip_address='%C@{NAS-IP-Address@}'
@end group
@end example

If you plan to use SQL database for multiple login checking
(@pxref{Multiple Login Checking}), you will have to supply at least
two additional queries for retrieving the information about currently
active sessions for a given user and realm (@pxref{Retrieving Session
Data}). Each of these queries must return a list consisting of
5-element tuples:

@example
@var{user-name}, @var{nas-ip-address}, @var{nas-port-id}, @var{acct-session-id}
@end example

For example, in our setup these queries will be:

@example
mlc_user_query SELECT user_name,nas_ip_address,\
                      nas_port_id,acct_session_id \
               FROM calls \
               WHERE user_name='%C@{User-Name@}' \
               AND status = 1

mlc_realm_query SELECT user_name,nas_ip_address,\
                       nas_port_id,acct_session_id \
                FROM calls \
                WHERE realm_name='%C@{Realm-Name@}'
@end example

While performing multiple login checking @command{radiusd} will
eventually need to close @dfn{hung} records, i.e. such records that are
marked as open in the database (@code{status=1}, in our setup), but
are actually not active (@xref{Verifying Active Sessions}, for the
description of why it may be necessary). It will by default use
@code{acct_stop_query} for that, but it has a drawback that hung
records will be marked as if they were closed correctly. This may not
be suitable for accounting purposes. The special query
@code{mlc_stop_query} is provided to override
@code{acct_stop_query}. If we mark hung records with @code{status=4},
then the @code{mlc_stop_query} will look as follows:

@example
mlc_stop_query UPDATE calls \
               SET status=4,\
                acct_session_time=unix_timestamp(now())-\
                                  unix_timestamp(event_date_time) \
               WHERE user_name='%C@{User-Name@}' \
                 AND status = 1 \
                 AND acct_session_id='%C@{Acct-Session-Id@}'
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node rewrite file
@section Rewrite functions --- @file{raddb/rewrite}
@cindex @file{rewrite}, configuration file
@cindex @file{raddb/rewrite}, configuration file

The file @file{raddb/rewrite} contains definitions of Rewrite extension
functions. For information regarding Rewrite extension language
@xref{Rewrite}.

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node menus directory
@section Login Menus --- @file{raddb/menus}
@cindex @file{menus}, configuration subdirectory
@cindex @file{raddb/menus}, configuration subdirectory

The menus is a way to allow user the choice between various services
he could be provided. The menu functionality is enabled when Radius
is compiled with @option{--enable-livingston-menus} option.

A user is presented a menu after it is authenticated if the @RHS{}
of his profile record consists of a single @AVP{} in the form:

@example
Menu = <menu-name>
@end example

@noindent

The menu files are stored in directory @file{raddb/menus}.

@menu
* Syntax: menu syntax.          A menu file syntax.
* Example: menu example.        An example of menu files.
@end menu

@comment ***L3**************************************************************
@node menu syntax
@subsection A menu file syntax.
@cindex  menu, syntax

A menu file is a text file containing a menu declaration and any number
of choice descriptions. The menus can be nested to an arbitrary depth.

A comment is introduced by a @samp{#} character. All characters from
this one up to the end of line are discarded.

The menu declaration is contained between the words @samp{menu} and
@samp{end}. Each of these must be the only word on a line and must
start in column 1.

Choice descriptions follow the menu declaration. Each description
starts with a line containing choice identifier. A choice identifier
is an arbitrary word identifying this choice, or a word @samp{DEFAULT}.
It is followed by comma-separated list of @AVP{}s which will be
returned to the server when a user selects this choice.

@comment ***L3**************************************************************
@node menu example
@subsection An example of menu files
@exindex @file{menus} file

@heading Single-Level Menu

Suppose the following file is stored under @file{raddb/menus/menu1}:

@example
menu
        *** Welcome EEE user! ***
Please select an option:

        1. Start CSLIP session
        2. Start PPP session
        3. Quit

        Option:
end
# CSLIP choice
# Framed-IP-Address of 255.255.255.254 indicates that the NAS should
# select an address for the user from its own IP pool.
1
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = SLIP,
        Framed-IP-Address = 255.255.255.254,
        Termination-Menu = "menu1"
# PPP choice
2
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = PPP,
        Framed-IP-Address = 255.255.255.254,
        Termination-Menu = "menu1"
# A special menu EXIT means abort the session
3
        Menu = "EXIT"
# Return to this menu if no valid choice have been entered
DEFAULT
        Menu = "menu1"
@end example

Now, suppose the @file{raddb/users} contains the following
profile entry:

@example
DEFAULT Auth-Type = System
        Menu = "menu1"
@end example

@noindent
and user @samp{jsmith} has a valid system account and tries to log in
from some @NAS{}. Upon authenticating the user, the Radius server sees that
his reply pairs contain the @attr{Menu} attribute. Radius then sends
Access-Challenge packet to the @NAS{} with the text of the menu in it.
The @samp{jsmith} then sees on his terminal:

@example
        *** Welcome EEE user! ***
Please select an option:

        1. Start CSLIP session
        2. Start PPP session
        3. Quit

        Option:
@end example

He then enters @samp{2}. The @NAS{} sends the Access-Request packet to the
server, which sees that user wishes to use option 2 and replies to the
@NAS{} with an Access-Accept packet containing the following attributes:

@example
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = PPP,
        Framed-IP-Address = 255.255.255.254,
        Termination-Menu = "menu1"
@end example

@noindent
The @attr{Termination-Menu} in this list makes sure the same process
will continue when @samp{jsmith} logs out, i.e. he will be presented
the same menu again until he enters choice @samp{3} which will
disconnect him.


@heading Nested menus

In this example, the @samp{other} choice refers to the menu above.

@example
menu
        *** Welcome here! ***
Please enter an option:
        ppp     ---     Start PPP session
        telnet  ---     Begin guest login session
        other   ---     Select other option

        Enter your choice:
end
ppp
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = PPP
telnet
        Service-Type = Login-User,
        Login-IP-Host = 10.11.11.7,
        Login-Service = Telnet,
        Login-TCP-Port = 23
other
        Menu = "menu1"
DEFAULT
        menu = "menu2"
@end example

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node Macro Substitution
@section Macro Substitution

Some statements in the configuration files need to use the actual
values of the attributes supplied with the request. These are:

@itemize @bullet
@item @attr{Exec-Program} and @attr{Exec-Program-Wait} assignments in @file{users} database
@item @sc{sql} query templates in @file{sqlserver}
@end itemize

In these statements the following macros are replaced by the value
of corresponding attributes:

@table @code
@item %Cnum
(num is a decimal number). This variable is replaced by the value of
attribute number `num'. The attribute is looked up in the incoming request
pairlist.
@item %C@{attr-name@}
This is replaced by the value of attribute named `attr-name'. The
attribute is looked up in the incoming request pairlist.
@item %Rnum
(num is a decimal number). This variable is replaced by the value of
attribute number `num'. The attribute is looked up in the reply
pairlist.
@item %R@{attr-name@}
This is replaced by the value of attribute named `attr-name'. The
attribute is looked up in the reply pairlist.
@item %D
This is replaced by current date/time (localtime).
@item %G
This is replaced by current date/time in GMT.
@end table

The exact substitution procedure varies depending on the type
of the attribute referenced by macro. If the attribute is of
string or date type, @radiusd{} first checks if the resulting
substitution should be quoted. It does so by looking at the character
immediately preceding @samp{%}. If it is a single or double quote,
then @radiusd{} assumes the macro must be quoted and replaces it
by an appropriately modified attribute value. The purpose of the
modification is to ensure that no characters within the expanded
string would conflict with the quoting characters. In particular,
@radiusd{} searches the attribute value for any of the
characters @samp{\}, @samp{'}, @samp{"} and prepends
a @samp{\} to any occurrence of these. For example, suppose that
attribute @attr{NAS-Identifier} has the value @samp{A "new" host}.
Then:

@example
@group
nasid=%C@{NAS-Identifier@} @expansion{} nasid=A "new" host
nasid="%C@{NAS-Identifier@}" @expansion{} nasid="A \"new\" host"
nasid=%\C@{NAS-Identifier@} @expansion{} nasid=A \"new\" host
@end group
@end example

The last example illustrates the use of backslash character to force
string quoting in the absence of explicit quotation marks.

If an integer attribute reference is quoted, @radiusd{} looks
up the string translation of its value in the dictionary
(@pxref{VALUE}) and uses this string as a replacement. If no
translation is found, the numeric value is used. The following
example assumes that the value of @attr{Acct-Terminate-Cause}
attribute is 10:

@example
@group
reason=%C@{Acct-Terminate-Cause@} @expansion{} reason=10
reason='%C@{Acct-Terminate-Cause@}' @expansion{} reason='NAS-Request'
reason=%\C@{Acct-Terminate-Cause@} @expansion{} reason=NAS-Request
@end group
@end example

Again, a backslash after percent sign can be used to force
dictionary lookup.

@FIXME{The quoting rules are not flexible enough. For example,
a string 'isn\'t it a string' may be produced, but backslash escape
within a singly quoted string is useless in most implementations (e.g.
in shell or SQL). Besides, quoting unconditionally replaces
unprintable characters with their octal values, where the notion
of ``unprintable'' is determined by the current locale. Is it always
the right thing to do?}

The ``@samp{@{@}} form'' allows to specify default value for the
substitution. The default value will be used when no such attribute
is encountered in the pairlist. The syntax for specifying the default
value resembles that of shell environment variables.

The substitution @code{%C@{@var{attr-name}:-@var{defval}@}} is expanded
to the value of @var{attr-name} attribute, if it is present in the
request pairlist, and to @var{defval} otherwise. For example:

@example
        %C@{Acct-Session-Time:-0@}
@end example

@noindent
will return the value of Acct-Session-Time attribute or 0 if it
doesn't exist in the request pairlist.

@FIXME{Should the quoting rules apply for @var{defval} as well? I'd
say they should...}

The substitution @code{%C@{@var{attr-name}:=@var{defval}@}} is expanded
to the value of @var{attr-name} attribute. If this attribute is not
present in the request pairlist, it will be created and assigned the
value @var{defval}. E.g.:

@example
        %C@{Acct-Session-Time:=0@}
@end example

The substitution @code{%C@{@var{attr-name}:?@var{message}@}} is expanded
to the value of @var{attr-name} attribute, if it is present. Otherwise
the diagnostic message ``@var{attr-name}: @var{message}'' is issued to
the log error channel, and string ``@var{message}'' is returned.

The substitution @code{%C@{@var{attr-name}:+@var{retval}@}} is expanded
to empty string if the attribute @var{attr-name} is present in the
referenced pairlist. Otherwise it is expanded to @var{retval}.

You can also use the following shortcuts:

@table @code
@item %p
Port number
@item %n
@NAS{} @IP{}
@item %f
Framed @IP{}
@item %u
User name
@item %c
Callback-Number
@item %i
Calling-Station-Id
@item %t
MTU
@item %a
Protocol (SLIP/PPP)
@item %s
Speed (Connect-Info attribute)
@end table
