@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Logging, Problem Tracking, Accounting, Top
@chapter Logging
@cindex Logging

GNU Radius reports every event worth mentioning. The events are
segregated by their severity level. Radius discerns the following
levels (in order of increasing severity):

@table @code
@item Debug
The debug messages (@ref{Debugging}).

@item Auth
Under this level every authentication attempt is logged. This is enabled
by setting
@example
level auth;
@end example
@noindent
in the @code{category auth} statement of the @file{config} file.

@item Proxy
Messages regarding proxy requests (@pxref{Proxying}).

@item Info
Informational messages.

@item Notice
Normal, but significant conditions.

@item Warning
Warning conditions. These mean some deviations from normal work.

@item Error
Error conditions. Usually these require special attention.

@item CRIT
Critical conditions due to which Radius is no longer able to continue
working. These require urgent actions from the site administrator.

@end table

By default, all messages in all levels are output to the file
@file{radlog/radius.log}. In addition, messages in level
@code{CRIT} are also duplicated to the system console. These defaults
can be overridden using @code{logging} statement in the
@file{raddb/config} file.
(@xref{logging,,logging statement}, for the description of logging
statement syntax; @pxref{Naming Conventions} for information about the
locations of different Radius configuration files.)
