@c This is part of the GNU Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2003-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Naming Conventions, Operation, Intro, Top
@chapter Naming Conventions
@cindex Naming conventions

This chapter describes file naming conventions used throughout this
document.

Programs from the GNU Radius package use the following directories
to store various configuration and log files:

@table @dfn
@item Configuration or database directory
A directory where all configuration files are stored.

@item Log directory
A directory where @radiusd{} stores its log files.

@item Accounting directory
A directory where @radiusd{} stores accounting detail files
(@pxref{Detailed Request Accounting}).

@item Data directory
A directory where shared data files are stored, such as @code{Rewrite}
or @code{Scheme} source files.

@end table

The default locations of these directories are determined at compile
time. Usually these are:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .20 .45

@item Directory @tab Short name @tab Default location 

@item Configuration directory
@cindex Configuration directory
@cindex @file{raddb}
@tab @file{raddb}
@tab @value{RADDB}

@item Log directory
@cindex Log directory
@cindex @file{radlog}
@tab @file{radlog}
@tab @value{RADLOG}

@item Accounting directory
@cindex Accounting directory
@cindex @file{radacct}, accounting directory
@tab @file{radacct}
@tab @value{RADACCT}

@item Data directory
@cindex Data directory
@cindex @file{datadir}, directory for shared data files
@tab @file{datadir}
@tab @value{DATADIR}

@end multitable

These locations may differ depending on your local site configuration.

Throughout this document we will refer to these directories by their
short names.  For example, when we say:

@example
... this information is contained in file @file{raddb/sqlserver} 
@end example

@noindent
we actually mean @file{@value{RADDB}/sqlserver}.

To get the default directory names that your version of Radius was
compiled with, run @command{radiusd --version}.

Locations of these directories may be overridden by
specifying the appropriate command line options. For
example, any program from the GNU Radius package accepts the command
line option @option{-d} or @option{--directory}, which introduces
the configuration directory path. 

