@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radauth, Radctl, Radping, Utility Programs
@section @command{radauth}
@pindex radauth

The @command{radauth} utility sends the Radius server an @code{Access-Request}
packet and displays the result it gets. If the server responds with
@code{Access-Accept} @command{radauth} can also send an
@code{Accounting-Request} thereby initiating user's session.

The utility is a @command{radtest} program. @xref{Sample Radtest
Program}, for the detailed discussion of its internals.

@subheading Invocation

@example
radauth [@var{options}] [@var{command}] @var{user-name} [@var{password}]
@end example

@noindent
Options are:

@table @option
@item -v
Print verbose descriptions of what is being done.

@item -n @var{nas-ip}
Set @NAS{} @IP{}

@item -s @var{sid}
Set accounting session ID

@item -P @var{port}
Set @NAS{} port number.
@end table

@FIXME{GNU long options are not yet supported}

@noindent
Valid commands are:

@table @asis
@item auth
Send only @code{Access-Request}. This is the default.

@item acct
Send @code{Access-Request}. If successful, send
@code{Accounting-Request} with @code{Acct-Status-Type = Start}.

@item start
Send @code{Accounting-Request} with @code{Acct-Status-Type = Start}.

@item stop
@code{Accounting-Request} with @code{Acct-Status-Type = Stop}.
@end table

The program determines which Radius server to use, the authentication
port number, and the shared secret, following the procedure common to all
client scripts (@pxref{clientconf}).

@c End of radauth.texi
