@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radlast
@section @command{radlast}
@pindex radlast

The @command{radlast} utility lists sessions of specified users, @NAS{}es,
@NAS{} ports, and hosts, in reverse time order. By default, each line of output
contains the login name, the @NAS{} short name and port number from where the
session was conducted, the host IP or name, the start and stop
times for the session, and the duration of the session. If the session
is still continuing, @command{radlast} will so indicate.

When the @option{-l} option is specified, @command{radlast} produces long
output. It includes following fields:

@itemize @bullet
@item Login name
@item @NAS{} short name
@item Port number
@item Connection protocol
@item Port type
@item Session @sc{id}
@item Caller @sc{id}
@item Framed IP address
@item Session Start Time
@item Session Stop Time
@item Duration of the Session
@end itemize


@menu
* Options: radlast options.      Command line options.
@end menu

@comment *******************************************************************
@node radlast options
@subsection @command{radlast} Command Line Options
@pindex @command{radlast}, options

Use following command line options to control the behavior of the
@command{radlast} utility:

@table @option
@item -@var{number}
@itemx -c @var{number}
@itemx --count=@var{number}
When given this option, @command{radlast} will output at most this many
lines of information.

@item -f
@itemx --file=@var{name}
Read the specified file instead of the default @file{/var/log/radwtmp}.

@item -h @var{hostname}
@itemx --host=@var{hostname}
Report the logins from given host. Host can be either a name or a
dotted-quad Internet address.

@item -n @var{shortname}
@itemx --nas=@var{shortname}
Report the logins from the given @NAS{}.

@item -l
@itemx --long-format
Long output format. Report all the information stored in
@file{radwtmp} file.

@item -p @var{number}
@itemx --port=@var{number}
Report the logins on a given port. The port may be specified either fully or
abbreviated, e.g. @code{radlast -p S03} or @code{radlast -p 3}.

@item -s
@itemx --show-seconds
Report the duration of the login session in seconds instead of the
default days, hours, and minutes.

@item -t
The same as @option{-p}. This flag is provided for compatibility with
@command{last(1)}.

@item -w
@itemx --wide
Widen the duration field to show seconds as well as the default days,
hours and minutes.

@end table

If multiple arguments are given, the logical @sc{or} operation between them
is assumed, i.e., the information selected by each argument
is printed. This, however, does not apply to the @option{-c}
option. That option is
always combined with the rest of command line by logical @sc{and}.

The pseudo-user @samp{~reboot} logs in on every reboot of the network access
server.

If @command{radlast} is interrupted, it indicates to what date the search
had progressed.
