@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radscm
@section @command{radscm}: A Guile Interface to Radius Functions
@pindex radscm
@cindex Guile interface

@command{radscm} is a Scheme interpreter based on Guile with the addition
of special functions and variables for communicating with
@command{radiusd}. This chapter concentrates on the special features
provided by @command{radscm}. Refer to Guile documentation for
information about Scheme and Guile (@pxref{Top,,Overview,guile,The
Guile Reference Manual}).

@heading Variables

@deffn Variable %raddb-path
A path to the Radius configuration directory.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-server-list
A list of radius servers. Each element of the list is:

@smalllisp
(list @var{id-str host-str secret-str auth-num acct-num
      cntl-num})
@end smalllisp

@noindent
where the arguments are as follows:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .45
@item @var{id-str}            @tab Server @sc{id}
@item @var{host-str}          @tab Server hostname or IP
@item @var{secret-str}        @tab Shared secret key to use
@item @var{auth-num}          @tab Authentication port number
@item @var{acct-num}          @tab Accounting port number
@item @var{cntl-num}          @tab Control channel port number
@end multitable
Thus, each entry can be used as an argument to
@code{rad-client-set-server} or
@code{rad-client-add-server}.
@end deffn

@heading Functions

@deffn Function rad-send-internal @var{port-number} @var{code-number} @var{pair-list}
Sends the request to currently selected server.
Arguments are:

@table @var
@item  port-number
Port number to use. These values are allowed:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .40
@item  0         @tab Authentication port
@item  1         @tab Accounting port
@item  2         @tab Control port
@end multitable
@noindent
The actual port numbers are those configured for
the given server.
@item  code-number
Request code.
@item  pair-list
List of attribute-value pairs. Each pair is either
@smalllisp
        (cons @var{attr-name-str value})
@end smalllisp
or
@smalllisp
        (cons @var{attr-number value})
@end smalllisp
@end table
@noindent

Return: On success,
@smalllisp
        (list @var{return-code-number pair-list})
@end smalllisp
On failure,
@smalllisp
        '()
@end smalllisp
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-send @var{port-number} @var{code-number} @var{pair-list} . @var{verbose}
Sends a radius request. Actually it does the same work as
@command{rad-send-internal},
but if @var{verbose} is specified, the verbose report about interaction with
the radius server is printed.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-list-servers
List currently configured servers. Two columns for each server are displayed:
server @sc{id} and IP.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-get-server
Returns the @sc{id} of the currently selected server.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-set-server @var{list}
Selects for use the server described by @var{list}. Here @var{list}
takes the form

@smalllisp
(list @var{id-str host-str secret-str auth-num acct-num
      cntl-num})
@end smalllisp
@noindent
where the elements are as follows:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .45
@item @var{id-str}            @tab Server @sc{id}
@item @var{host-str}          @tab Server hostname or IP
@item @var{secret-str}        @tab Shared secret key to use
@item @var{auth-num}          @tab Authentication port number
@item @var{acct-num}          @tab Accounting port number
@item @var{cntl-num}          @tab Control channel port number
@end multitable
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-add-server @var{list}
Adds the server described by @var{list} to the list of active servers.
Here @var{list} takes the form

@smalllisp
(list @var{id-str host-str secret-str auth-num acct-num
      cntl-num})
@end smalllisp

@noindent
where the elements are as follows:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .45
@item @var{id-str}            @tab Server @sc{id}
@item @var{host-str}          @tab Server hostname or IP
@item @var{secret-str}        @tab Shared secret key to use
@item @var{auth-num}          @tab Authentication port number
@item @var{acct-num}          @tab Accounting port number
@item @var{cntl-num}          @tab Control channel port number
@end multitable
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-read-no-echo @var{prompt-str}
Prints the given @var{prompt-str}, disables echoing, reads a string up to the
next newline character, restores echoing, and returns the string entered.
This is the interface to the C @command{getpass(3)} function.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-source-ip @var{ip-str}
Sets the IP to be used as source. @var{ip-str} can be either an
IP in dotted-quad form or a hostname.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-timeout @var{number}
Sets the timeout in seconds for waiting for a server reply.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-client-retry @var{number}
Sets the number of retries for sending requests to a Radius server.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-format-code @var{dest-bool} @var{code-number}
Format a radius reply code into a human-readable form.
@var{dest-bool} has the same meaning as in @code{format}
(@pxref{Formatted Output,,Formatted Output,guile,The Guile Reference Manual}.)
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-format-pair @var{dest-bool} @var{pair}
Format a radius attribute-value pair for output.
@var{dest-bool} has the same meaning as in @code{format}.
@var{pair} is either
@smalllisp
                (cons @var{name-str value})
@end smalllisp
or
@smalllisp
                (cons @var{attr-number value})
@end smalllisp
@noindent
where @var{value} may be of any type appropriate for the given attribute.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-print-pairs @var{dest-bool} @var{pair-list}
Output the radius attribute-value pairs from @var{pair-list}.
@var{dest-bool} has the same meaning as in format.
@var{pair-list} is a list of pairs in the form

@smalllisp
                (cons @var{name-str value})
@end smalllisp
@noindent
or

@smalllisp
                (cons @var{attr-number value})
@end smalllisp
@noindent
where @var{value} may be of any type appropriate for the given attribute.

All @attr{Reply-Message} pairs from the list are concatenated and displayed
as one.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-format-reply-msg @var{pair-list} . @var{text}
Concatenate and print text from all @attr{Reply-Message} pairs from
@var{pair-list}. If @var{text} is specified, it is printed before the
concatenated
text.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-list-servers
For each server from @code{rad-server-list}, print its @sc{id} and hostname
or IP.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-select-server @var{ID-STR}
Select the server identified by @var{id-str} as a current server. The server
data are looked up in rad-server-list variable.
@end deffn

@deffn Function rad-add-server @var{id-str}
Add the server identified by @var{id-str} to the list of current servers.
The server data are looked up in rad-server-list variable.
@end deffn
