@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radwho
@section @command{radwho}
@pindex radwho

@command{Radwho} displays the list of users currently logged in by the
Radius server.

Default output information is made compatible with that of the standard
@UNIX{} @code{finger(1)} utility. For each user the following information is
displayed: login name, name, connection protocol, @NAS{} port, login date,
@NAS{} name, assigned IP or corresponding network name.

When used with @option{-l} option, the long output format is used. In
this format the following information is output:

@table @samp
@item Login
Login name of the user
@item SessionID
Unique session @sc{id} assigned by the terminal server.
@item Proto
Connection prototype.
@item Port
Port number
@item When
Login date and time
@item From
Name of the @NAS{} that accepted the connection.
@item Location
Framed IP or the corresponding network name.
@item Caller
Caller station @sc{id} ad reported by the @NAS{}.
@item Duration
Duration of the session.
@end table

@menu
* Options: radwho options.      Command line options.
* Format Strings::
* Predefined Formats::
@end menu

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node radwho options
@subsection @command{radwho} Command Line Options
@cindex @command{radwho}, command line options

The following command line options can be used to modify the behavior
of the program:

@table @option
@item -A
@itemx --all
Display the information about logged-out users as well. The logged-out
users are shown with @samp{Proto} field set to HUP.

@item -c
@itemx --calling-id
Display the calling station @sc{id} in the second column. Equivalent to
@option{--format clid}.

@item -d @var{name}
@itemx --directory=@var{name}
Set the Radius configuration directory name.

@item -D @var{fmt}
@itemx --date-format=@var{fmt}
Set the date representation. The @var{fmt} argument is a usual
@code{strftime(3)} format string. It defaults to @code{%a %H:%M},
i.e. the abbreviated weekday name according to the current locale, and
the hour and the minutes as two-digit decimal numbers.

@item -e @var{string}
@itemx --empty=@var{string}
Display any empty field as @var{string}. This is useful when the output of
@command{radwho} is fed to some analyzing program, as it helps to keep
the same number of columns on each line of output.

@item -F
@itemx --finger
Start in @command{fingerd} mode. In this mode @command{radwho} emulates the
behavior of the @command{fingerd(8)} utility. Use this option if starting
@command{radwho} from the @file{/etc/inetd.conf} line like this @footnote{In this example the statement has been
split on two lines to fit the page width. It must occupy a
@emph{single line} in the real configuration file.}:

@example
finger stream tcp nowait nobody /usr/sbin/radwho
radwho -fL
@end example

@noindent
This mode is also enabled by default if @command{radwho} notices that its
name (@code{argv[0]}) is @samp{fingerd} or @samp{in.fingerd}.

@item -H
@itemx --no-header
Don't display header line.

@item -i
@itemx --session-id
Display session @sc{id} instead of @sc{gecos} in the second column.
Equivalent to @option{--format sid}.

@item -I
@itemx --ip-strip-domain
Display hostnames without domain part.

@item -u
@itemx --local-also
Display information about local users from the system @file{utmp} file.
May prove useful when running @command{radwho} as a finger daemon.

@item -n
@itemx --no-resolve
Do not resolve IP.

@item -o @var{format}
@itemx --format=@var{format}
Select customized output format. This can also be changed by setting
the value of environment variable @code{RADWHO_FORMAT}. The @var{format}
argument is either a symbolic name of one of the predefined formats or
a format specification (see next subsection).

@item -s
@itemx --secure
Run in secure mode. Queries without a user name are rejected.

@end table

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node Format Strings
@subsection @command{radwho} Format Strings
@cindex @command{radwho}, format strings

A format string controls the output of every record from @file{radutmp}.
It contains two types of objects: ordinary characters, which are simply
copied to the output, and format specifications, each of which causes
output of a particular piece of information from the @file{radutmp}
record.

Each format specification starts with an opening brace and ends with
a closing brace. The first word after the brace is the name of the
format specification. The rest of words are @dfn{positional arguments}
followed by @dfn{keyword arguments}. Both are optional. The keyword
arguments begin with a colon and must follow the positional arguments.

The full list of format specifications follows.

@deffn {Format Spec} newline [@var{count}]
Causes the newline character to be output. If the optional @var{count}
is supplied, that many newlines will be printed
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} tab [@var{num}]
Advance to the next tabstop in the output stream. If optional @var{num}
is present, then skip @var{num} tabstops. Each tabstop is eight
characters long.
@end deffn

The following specifications output particular fields of a @file{radutmp}
record. They all take two positional arguments: @var{width} and
@var{title}.

The first argument, @var{width} sets the maximum output
length for this specification. If the number of characters actually output
is less than the width, they will be padded with whitespace either to
the left or to the right, depending on the presence of the @code{:right}
keyword argument. If the number of characters is greater than @var{width}, they
will be truncated to fit. If @var{width} is
not given, the exact data are output as is.

The second argument, @var{title}, gives the title of this column for
the heading line. By default no title is output.

Every field specification accepts at least two keyword arguments.
The keyword @code{:right} may be used to request alignment to the right
for the data. This keyword is ignored if @var{width} is not given.

The keyword @code{:empty} followed by a string causes @command{radwho}
to output that string if the resulting value for this specification
would otherwise be empty.


@deffn {Format Spec} login @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Print the user login name.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} orig-login @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Print original login name as supplied with the request.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} gecos @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
The @sc{gecos} field from the local @file{/etc/passwd} corresponding
to the login name.
If the user does not have a local account, his login name is output.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} nas-port @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
@NAS{} port number
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} session-id @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
The session @acronym{ID}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} nas-address @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right][:nodomain]
The @NAS{} name or IP.

The @code{:nodomain} keyword suppresses the output of the domain part of
the name, i.e., the hostname is displayed only up to the first dot.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} framed-address @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right][:nodomain]
Framed IP assigned to the user, if any.

The @code{:nodomain} keyword suppresses the output of the domain part of
the name, i.e. the hostname is displayed only up to the first dot.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} protocol @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Connection protocol as reported by @attr{Framed-Protocol} attribute.
If the symbolic value is found in the dictionary file, it will be
displayed. Otherwise, the numeric value will be displayed as is.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} time @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right][:format @var{date-format}]
Date and time when the session started.

The @code{:format} keyword introduces the @code{strftime} format string
to be used when converting the date for printing. The default value is
@code{%a %H:%M}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} duration @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Total time of the session duration.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} delay @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Delay time (@pxref{Acct-Delay-Time}).
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} port-type @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
Port type as reported by the value of the @attr{NAS-Port-Type} attribute.
If the symbolic value is found in the dictionary file, it will be
displayed. Otherwise, the numeric value will be displayed as is.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} clid @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right]
The calling station @acronym{ID}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Format Spec} realm @var{width} @var{title} [:empty @var{repl}][:right][:nodomain]
If the request was forwarded to a realm server, print the symbolic name
of the realm from the @file{raddb/realms} file. If no symbolic name
is found, print the remote server IP or hostname. In the latter case,
the @code{:nodomain} keyword may be used to suppress the output of the
domain part of the name, i.e. to display the hostname only up to the
first dot.
@end deffn


@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node Predefined Formats
@subsection @command{radwho} Predefined Formats
@cindex @command{radwho}, predefined formats

The predefined formats are:

@table @samp
@item default
Default output format. Each record occupies one line. The fields output
are: login name, @sc{gecos} name, connection protocol, port number, time when
the connection was initiated, @NAS{} IP, and assigned framed IP. This
corresponds to the following format specification (split in several
lines for readability:

@example
(login 10 Login) (gecos 17 Name) \
(protocol 5 Proto) (nas-port 5 TTY) \
(time 9 When) (nas-address 9 From) \
(framed-address 16 Location)
@end example

@item sid
The same as @samp{default}, except that the session ID is output in
the second column.

@item clid
The same as @samp{default}, except that the calling station ID is output in
the second column.

@item long
Outputs all information from each @file{radutmp} record. It is
equivalent to specifying the following format string:

@example
(login 32 Login) (session-id 32 SID) \
(protocol 5 Proto) (nas-port 5 Port) \
(time 27 Date) (nas-address 32 NAS) \
(clid 17 CLID) (duration 7 Duration) \
(framed-address 16 Location) (realm 16 Realm)
@end example

@item gnu
Each @file{radutmp} record is represented as a table. It is
equivalent to specifying the following format string:

@example
User: (login)(newline)\
In real life: (gecos)(newline)\
Logged in: (time)(newline)\
NAS: (nas-address)(newline)\
Port: (nas-port)(newline)\
CLID: (clid)(newline)\
Protocol: (protocol)(newline)\
Session ID: (session-id)(newline)\
Uptime: (duration)(newline)\
Assigned IP: (framed-address)(newline)\
Realm: (realm)(newline)"
@end example

@end table
